                                                 Document of
                                             The World Bank Group

                                          FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                                                                                       Report No. 123031-BJ




               INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

                            INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

                               INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

                         MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

                                 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK

                                                      FOR

                                                     BENIN

                                       FOR THE PERIOD FY19–FY23

                                                 June 6, 2018




AFCF2 Country Management Unit
Country Department AFCF2
Africa Region

The International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Region

The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Sub-Saharan Africa Department



 This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
 official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank Group authorization.
          The date of the last Country Partnership Strategy was April 9, 2013
                                CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                   US$ 1.00 = CFAF532 BCEAO (as of April 30, 2018)

                                    FISCAL YEAR
                              January 1 to December 31

                          ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AFD           French Development Agency (Agence Française de Développement)
AfDB          African Development Bank
ARCH          Health Insurance Program (Assurance pour le Renforcement du Capital Humain)
ASA           Advisory Services and Analytics
CAT-DDO       Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
CCT           Conditional Cash Transfer
CDD           Community Driven Development
CLR           Completion and Learning Review
CPF           Country Partnership Framework
CPS           Country Partnership Strategy
CRI           Corporate Results Indicator
CWA           Compact with Africa
DPO           Development Policy Operation
DSA           Debt Sustainability Analysis
ECF           Extended Credit Facility
EU            European Union
FDI           Foreign Direct Investment
FM            Financial Management
GDP           Gross Domestic Product
GEF           Global Environment Facility
GHG           Greenhouse Gas
GNI           Gross National Income
GoB           Government of Benin
GPE           Global Partnership for Education
ICT           Information and Communication Technology
IFC           International Finance Corporation
IMF           International Monetary Fund
IT            Information Technology
M&E           Monitoring and Evaluation
MCC           U.S. Millennium Challenge Corporation
MFD           Maximizing Finance for Development
MIGA          Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MSME          Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
NDC           Nationally Determined Contribution
PADA          Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project
PAG           Government Action Program (Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement)
PFM           Public Finance Management
PIM           Public Investment Management
PLR            Performance and Learning Review
PPP            Public-Private Partnership
PSW            Private Sector Window
REDISSE        Regional Disease Surveillance Systems Enhancement
RSF            Risk Sharing Facility
SCD            Systematic Country Diagnostic
SMEs           Small and Medium Enterprises
SOE            State-Owned Enterprise
SUF            Scale Up Facility
SWEDD          Sahel Women’s Empowerment and Demographics
TA             Technical Assistance
T&D            Transmission and Distribution
SBEE           Société Béninoise d'Energie Electrique
SDG            Sustainable Development Goal
TF             Trust Fund
UNDP           United Nations Development Programme
WAAPP          West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program
WACA           West Africa Coastal Area
WAEMU          West African Economic Monetary Union




                           IDA                     IFC                    MIGA
Vice President:     Makhtar Diop        Sérgio Pimenta             Keiko Honda (CEO)
Director:           Pierre Laporte      Cheikh Oumar Seydi         Merli Baroudi
Task Team Leader:   Katrina Sharkey     Ronke Amoni Ogunsulire     Paul Barbour
                              FY19–FY23 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK FOR BENIN

                                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS


I.     INTRODUCTION ..........................................................................................................................1
II.    COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA ......................................................................2
       Social and Political Context ................................................................................................................... 2
       Recent Economic Developments .......................................................................................................... 3
       Poverty profile ...................................................................................................................................... 6
       Drivers of Poverty and Development Challenges ................................................................................. 7
       Development Agenda ........................................................................................................................... 7
III.        WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY...................................................................10
       Government Program and Medium-Term Strategy ........................................................................... 10
       Proposed WBG Country Partnership Framework ............................................................................... 11
       Lessons from CPS Completion Review, IEG Evaluation, and Stakeholder Consultations ................... 11
       Overview of World Bank Group Strategy ........................................................................................... 13
       Focus Area 1: Structural Transformation for Competitiveness and Productivity ............................... 21
       Focus Area 2: Investing in Human Capital .......................................................................................... 29
       Focus Area 3: Increasing Resilience and Reducing Climate-Related Vulnerability ............................. 32
       Implementing the CPF ........................................................................................................................ 35
IV.         MANAGING RISKS TO THE CPF PROGRAM............................................................................38
       Political and Governance Risks ........................................................................................................... 38
Annex 1: CPF Results Matrix .............................................................................................................40
Annex 2: Completion and Learning Review .......................................................................................53
List of Tables
Table 1. Key Economic and Financial Indicators ........................................................................................... 5
Table 2. SCD Proposed Pathways, Actions, and CPF Operational Response .............................................. 17
Table 3. Constraints to Achieving Twin Goals Identified by the SCD .......................................................... 17
Table 4. Alignment of Government Priorities, World Bank Group Comparative Advantage and CPF
Objectives ................................................................................................................................................... 18
Table 5. CPF Areas of Engagement ............................................................................................................. 20
Table 6. CPF Financing ................................................................................................................................ 36
Table 7. World Bank Group Knowledge Services and TFs FY19–FY23 ........................................................ 37
Table 8. Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT)............................................................................ 38


List of Figures
Figure 1. Poverty Incidence........................................................................................................................... 7
Figure 2. Country Partnership Framework.................................................................................................. 13
I.      INTRODUCTION

1.       This Country Partnership Framework (CPF) sets out the strategy for how the World Bank
Group will support Benin in achieving higher rates of economic and social well-being over the period
FY19–FY23. The Republic of Benin is a small country with a large potential for improving the well-being
of its people. With a population of roughly 10.9 million people, Benin is renowned for the stability of
its democratic system of government (since 1990). It is endowed with relatively fertile agricultural
land, a long border shared with the region’s economic giant, Nigeria, and a strategic location as a hub
connecting coastal and landlocked countries to the north. Despite these advantages, Benin’s
development indicators are among the world’s lowest: the absolute number of people living in poverty
has increased in recent years and conditions are particularly bad for women, people living in lagging
regions in the north of the country, and young job-seekers. The country is also highly exposed to the
environmental and social consequences of climate change, affecting agriculture productivity, health,
food security, economic development, physical infrastructure, and water resources.

2.       The Government of Benin (GoB) proposes to improve its state of development through its
Government Action Program 2016–2021 (Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement [PAG]). Adopted at
the outset of the recently elected (2016) government of President Patrice Talon, the PAG starts with
the premise that given Benin’s long history of democratic stability, its natural resource endowment,
and its strategic location within West Africa, it can achieve much higher rates of economic and social
well-being through a three-pronged approach: (a) consolidation of democracy, the rule of law, and
good governance; (b) structural transformation of the economy; and (c) improvement of social well-
being. The PAG is premised on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (embodying its related
goals [SDGs]) as well as the Paris Climate Agreement.

3.       What this CPF is about. This CPF helps Benin achieve its development objectives (as embodied
in the PAG) by focusing on more effective employment of its human and natural resources and
geographical advantages in ways that are sustainable, resilient, and inclusive. This CPF takes as its
point of departure the Systematic Country Diagnostic for Benin (SCD – Report Nº 114822-BJ). In accord
with the first IDA18 Special Theme, Jobs and Economic Transformation, the SCD identifies better
employing its human resources—through job creation—as a primary challenge to Benin’s
achievements of the twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. More
specifically, it emphasizes the need for higher productivity jobs, as the current overwhelming
preponderance of low productivity, insecure, and informal employment has led to stubborn poverty
and inequality. The SCD prioritizes development of Benin’s vast agricultural potential as the primary
avenue for better employment of its natural resources while simultaneously creating higher
productivity jobs. It also emphasizes the benefits to Benin in taking greater advantage of its unique
geographical position, not only as a neighbor and trade partner of Nigeria, but as a transport hub
linking the coast to landlocked countries of the interior.

4.       Helping Benin overcome impediments to achieving the twin goals. To achieve these goals,
the SCD addresses structural impediments—regulatory, low human capital, governance related, and
infrastructural, among others—that must be overcome to enable effective use of its resources and
locational advantages. While the SCD advocates an accelerated process of structural transformation,
and that this process ensures inclusiveness so that poor households and vulnerable groups, and
especially women, can effectively engage in a growing, more productive and competitive economy.
As also emphasized in the SCD, Benin requires a singular focus on sustainability and resilience to
climate change, both in terms of ensuring (i) adequate governance systems to improve the
productivity and sustainable use of natural resources, as well as (ii) improved resilience of households
and the economy to climate change and other shocks.




                                                   1
5.        What this CPF is not about. This CPF proposes a lending and nonlending program that is
selective: it recognizes that the World Bank Group neither has the resources nor the comparative
advantage to cover all aspects of Benin’s ambitious development agenda. Rather, it ensures that the
Group’s activities are rooted in the PAG and the SCD and are within the reach of available resources
and the World Bank Group’s comparative advantage relative to other development partners. As such,
it will ensure consistency with the SDGs and address IDA 18 Special Themes while drawing upon IDA
18 Special Windows for financing operations.

6.       The proposed CPF program will be focused on achieving high impact outcomes while
leveraging scarce resources. The IDA allocation of US$482 million 1 for Benin is modest considering
the needs and transformational ambitions of the Government’s plans. For the World Bank Group to
provide effective support, the IDA allocation will be selectively targeted and leveraged by drawing
upon cross-Group synergies, by making best use of the full array of IDA18 and Africa Region special
initiatives, maximizing finance for development (MFD), and partnering with other international
development agencies in ways that best employ the comparative advantages of each. The World Bank
Group seeks to apply these resources to become a game changer across a number of areas, including
the following:

          x     Agriculture. The CPF program proposes deploying a range of the World Bank Group’s
                instruments to help the GoB achieve its goal of transforming agriculture from low-
                productivity and largely subsistence-based activities to meeting its potential for high
                growth, more export-oriented production that contributes far more than at present to
                overall economic growth, and produces new jobs for a rapidly growing labor force.

          x     Water. The CPF program proposes a range of actions that will help the GoB to (i) manage
                water as a critical resource, including improved control of flooding in urban areas
                exacerbated by climate change, and (ii) achieve its ambitious goal of providing 100
                percent of its population access to drinking water (from the current 50 percent) by 2021.

          x     Economic empowerment of women. The CPF program proposes providing Benin’s
                women with considerably more economic power than is currently the case by
                mainstreaming activities focused on women in virtually all its operations.

II.       COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

Social and Political Context

7.       Political background. Benin benefits from low political violence and the stability of its
democratic institutions. Benin is widely regarded as one of the more successful cases of democratic
transition within Africa. Since 1991, elections have been held on peaceful terms and sitting Presidents
have vacated office following elections without incident. Presidential elections held in March 2016
were won by the prominent businessman Patrice Talon. In December 2016, the new government
adopted the PAG structured around 45 flagship projects aimed at improving the productivity and living
conditions of the population. While support for the PAG’s objectives is widespread, President Talon’s
government faces political opposition. His proposals to reform Benin’s political model to increase
accountability and transparency (included within the PAG) were rejected by Parliament in April 2017.
The sociopolitical atmosphere remains largely favorable and conducive for reforms, but economic
expectations remain high and there is pressure on the government to accelerate efforts to reduce high


1 This figure is indicative. The exact amount of the IDA allocation will ultimately depend on a number of factors, including
Benin’s policy and portfolio performance, gross national income (GNI) per capita and population, and indicators for other
IDA-eligible countries.


                                                              2
youth unemployment, address poor living standards, accelerate economic growth, and improve the
quality of public services.

8.      Political economy. The political economy is characterized by a concentration of powerful
interests and a resulting uneven playing field, weak institutions, poor governance, and incidents of
corruption. As elaborated in the SCD, Benin’s potential for achieving the twin goals has faltered for
several reasons, including those related to political economy: low levels of trust between economic
agents, weak institutions, and poor governance. Benin’s economy is divided between a few large,
formal, dominant enterprise groups and a multitude of informal microenterprises. Few medium-size
enterprises exist. This situation reflects how powerful interests have been successful in creating an
economic playing field that is tilted to their advantage and where it is difficult for new firms to
establish themselves, grow to scale, and compete with established interests.

9.      Geography: Sharing a long border with its neighboring economic powerhouse, Benin’s
economy is highly focused on serving the Nigerian market—almost exclusively informally. Nigeria’s
economy is large, growing, increasingly affluent and 63 times bigger than that of Benin. High levels of
trade protection in Nigeria have created profitable opportunities for Benin’s informal traders who
import goods for informal reexport to Nigeria across a porous border. Benin is also positioned as a
transit corridor for the landlocked countries to its north; it represents the shortest and most
competitive transport route to Niamey, and is a competitive option for goods destined for
Ouagadougou, northern Nigeria and parts of Mali and Chad. The transport industry and the Port of
Cotonou, referred to as the ‘lungs of the economy’, play a primary role in Benin’s economic fabric.

Recent Economic Developments

10.      Economic growth has been steady but too low to achieve sustainable poverty reduction.
Benin is a low-income economy with a per capita income of US$770 in 2016. Real gross domestic
product (GDP) grew on average by 4.2 percent annually during 2000–2016. Growth has accelerated
slightly over the last five years (2012–2016) to around 4.9 percent and was estimated to reach 5.4
percent in 2017. Given rapid population growth (about 3.2 percent), average annual growth in GDP
per capita was just over 1 percent for the period, below the Sub-Saharan African average and far below
the best performing economies.

11.     Informality predominates in the economy. The informal economy represents 65 percent of
GDP engaging 90 percent of the labor force and more than 95 percent of the female labor force.
Services and agriculture, accounting for approximately 50 percent and 25 percent of total value added,
respectively, are both dominated by the informal sector. The large share of services reflects Benin’s
role as a transit and trade hub for landlocked countries, primarily Niger and Burkina Faso, and the
large amount of informal reexport trade and commerce with Nigeria, which amounts to some 20
percent of GDP and 25 percent of government revenue.

12.     Benin is a member of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), a group
of seven Francophone countries and Guinea Bissau which share a common currency, the CFA Franc.
WAEMU members work toward greater regional integration with unified external tariffs. WAEMU has
established a common accounting system, periodic reviews of members' macroeconomic policies
based on convergence criteria, a regional stock exchange, and the legal and regulatory framework for
a regional banking system. Convergence criteria focus on the fiscal balance, inflation, outstanding
debt, arrears, the wage bill, public investment, and domestic revenue mobilization. Benin’s monetary
and exchange rate policies are managed at the regional level by the Central Bank of West African
States (BCEAO), which maintains a fixed peg between the CFA Franc and the Euro.




                                                  3
13.     The economy has grown primarily through the accumulation of factors rather than higher
productivity. As shown in the SCD, total factor productivity growth was negative over 2000–2015. In
addition, though capital accumulation has contributed more to growth than other factors over the
period, Benin underperformed compared to countries in other regions in terms of physical capital
accumulation. Indeed, over the past 10 years, gross capital formation in Benin averaged 23.7 percent
of GDP. This ratio is comparable to the average investment ratio in other West African Economic
Monetary Union (WAEMU) countries and IDA-only countries (23.4 percent), but is much lower than
developing East Asian economies (41.6 percent.)

14.      Benin has consistently reported high current account deficits that have been financed by
foreign direct investment (FDI) and concessional capital inflows. The marginal role of trade in Benin’s
growth process is noted by the low penetration of merchandise and service trade in GDP (66 percent
in 2015), which is significantly less than other small open, coastal economies. Not only has the flow of
trade been limited, but it has been concentrated in a few products and markets. The current account
deficit averaged 8 percent of GDP over the last decade, partly because of significant investments in
capital-intensive industries (oil exploration and cement) that required considerable imports of
intermediate and capital goods. The deficit grew from 7.7 percent of GDP in 2013 to about 8.4 percent
of GDP in 2015. In 2016, the current account deficit improved from 8.4 percent of GDP to 7.2 percent,
as investments slowed down and exports rebounded by 7 percent owing to the strong performance
of cotton. In 2017, the current account deficit was estimated to reach 9.2 percent of GDP, mainly as a
result of the increase in investments and the related increase of capital goods imports.

15.      Resulting from these factors, the economy does not generate enough high-quality jobs for
the rapidly growing population. The consistent decline of the manufacturing/industrial sector as a
share of GDP over the few decades stands in contrast to most fast-growing developing countries at
this stage of development, where labor typically leaves low-productivity agriculture and enters the
higher productivity manufacturing sector. Decline in manufacturing employment was not
compensated by improvements in services sector productivity as most of its expansion concentrated
in the low-productivity and informal sector. Employment in modern services has risen rapidly in recent
years but from too low a base to have a significant impact on total employment nationally. Job creation
rates in productive sectors remain too low to actively absorb the increasing labor supply, forcing new
labor force participants to settle in the informal and low-productivity commerce sector.

16.      Fiscal discipline has ensured Benin’s macroeconomic stability over the past decade but with
deviations associated with the political cycle. Benin’s fiscal stance had been prudent before the
recent electoral period, with limited budget deficits (including grants) of 0.4 percent in 2012, 2.6
percent in 2013, and 1.9 percent in 2014. However, the fiscal deficit increased up to 8 percent of GDP
in 2015 when the departing administration followed an expansionary fiscal policy before the 2016
Presidential elections. In addition, most of this additional spending was largely ineffective because of
inefficient public financial management (PFM), public investment management (PIM) and
procurement practices. The Government contained expenditures in 2016 and managed to reduce the
fiscal deficit to 6 percent of GDP. The authorities are trying to balance ambitious public investment
plans with a fiscally responsible budget position and appear committed to returning to a sustainable
fiscal and debt management approach. The PAG program is supported by an Extended Credit Facility
(ECF) three-year program approved by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Board on April 7, 2017,
providing macroeconomic and fiscal anchors that should help the implementation of reforms.

17.     The rural economy has been dominated by low-productivity agriculture where steady
output growth has been accompanied by a deforestation rate at over twice the Sub-Saharan
average. Analysis of the trends in Benin’s rural natural capital shows increasing values of cropland,
pastureland, and forests, indicating a solid foundation for higher productivity and income gains. Still,
sustainability issues arise in both agriculture and forestry due to trends in resource degradation,


                                                   4
unclear tenure rights, and water stresses exacerbated by climate change. Given the need for improved
agricultural productivity and the reliance on these resources by most of the population, including the
majority of the poor, these issues are of critical importance in sustainably achieving the twin goals.

                                Table 1. Key Economic and Financial Indicators
                                  2012    2013    2014      2015 2016 2017          2018     2019     2020
                                                                  Est.               Projections
 Real economy                                    (Annual percentage change)

 Real GDP                         4.8     7.2     6.4        2.1     4.0     5.4     6.0      6.3      6.7
 Contributions
      Consumption                  5.0     2.3     7.6       2.8     2.9     2.6      5.0      5.9      6.3
      Investment                   3.9     8.3     4.9      о2.2     0.9     7.8      1.1      2.1      2.2
    Net exports                   о4.1    о3.4    о6.1       1.5     0.2    о4.9     о0.2     о1.8     о1.9
      Imports                      2.0     7.7     8.3       0.0     1.0     7.8      3.6      4.8      5.1
      Exports                     о2.1     4.4     2.2       1.5     1.2     2.8      3.4      3.1      3.3
 Unemployment rate                 1.0     1.0     1.0       1.0     1.0     —        —        —        —
 (International Labour
 Organization definition)
 Consumer Price Index (end        6.8     о1.8    о0.8       2.3    о2.7     2.2     2.0      2.0      2.0
 of period)

 Fiscal accounts                                 Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated

 Expenditures                     19.6    21.0    19.1      25.3    21.4    24.2     21.9     20.4     19.7
 Revenues                         17.4    17.6    16.3      16.7    14.7    16.5     16.1     16.8     17.4
 General government               о2.2    о3.5    о2.8      о8.6    о6.7    о7.7     о5.8     о3.6     о2.3
 balance
 External Public and Publicly             16.7    19.8      21.3     23     23.8     25.4     26.9     27.4
 Guaranteed debt (end of
 period)
 Total public sector debt                 25.3    30.5      42.4    50.8    53.6     53.7     51.7     47.8

 Balance of payments                             Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated

 Current account balance          о8.2    о7.7    о8.8       о8.4    о7.2    о9.2     о8.1    о7.8     о7.3
 Imports                         о25.2   о28.3   о31.0      о28.8   о28.2   о31.4    о30.9   о31.6    о30.8
 Exports                          13.2    15.5    15.8       15.9    16.4    17.9     18.9    19.8     19.3
 FDI                               2.6     3.3     4.0        1.4     1.3     1.7      1.7     1.8      1.8
 Terms of trade                   о1.3     1.6     1.0        2.4     2.4     1.1     о0.9     0.3      2.1
 For example, GDP nominal        8,157   9,160   9,723      8,295   8,577   9,410   10,616   11,558   12,569
 in US$

18.      Debt is sustainable. The results of the external Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) carried out
in March 2017 show that Benin’s debt dynamics are sustainable under the baseline scenario, facing a
moderate risk of debt distress. Because of the recent debt increase, risk of debt distress is higher than
in the 2015 DSA. However, in the DSA baseline scenario, all debt indicators remain below their relevant
policy-dependent thresholds. The ratio of the present value of external debt to exports exceeds its
threshold in the case of an extreme shock to exports. Benin’s WAEMU membership ensures its ability
to pay in case of such a temporary shock. Total public (external and domestic) debt is projected to rise
during the scaling up of public investment, reaching about 53 percent of GDP in 2017 and 2018, and
declining afterwards. The IMF-supported program is anchored to the net present value of total debt-
to-GDP ratio, which remains consistently below the indicative benchmark of 56 percent, a level
considered linked to increased probability of debt distress for countries, like Benin, with moderate
capacity.


                                                        5
19.      Real GDP growth is projected to accelerate and average 6.3 percent during the period 2018–
2020. Public investment and private investment, underpinned by improvements in the business
environment, are expected to drive growth in the short term and medium term, respectively. Political
stability and reforms to the business climate will lead to increase in private investment. Continued
manufacturing investment is expected to provide some impetus to manufacturing GDP, while
agricultural output is expected to remain strong over the next years with greater productivity. Those
projections assume a recovery in neighboring Nigeria that will support a rebound of the reexport trade
which is one of the pillars of the Beninese economy. The successful implementation of the PAG will
further strengthen medium-term economic growth. Government investment plans are also intended
to accelerate, facilitate, and leverage related private sector investment, with many investments to be
pursued on a PPP basis. In this context, the use of expansive fiscal policy will be restrained by the need
to stabilize public debt, which has increased quickly since 2016.

Poverty profile

20.      Growth in Benin has been reasonably inclusive, contributing to a marked decline in poverty
between 2006 and 2015. World Bank estimates using the international poverty line show a decline in
poverty from 61 percent to 50 percent.2 Despite this decline, the absolute number of poor increased
from 5.0 to 5.3 million people, on account of a high rate of population growth of 3.2 percent. Inequality
is moderate with a Gini index of 41 in 2015. The decline in poverty is corroborated by improvements
in nonmonetary poverty indicators. Maternal mortality, for instance, fell from 498 (per 100,000 live
births) in 1996 to 347 in 2014, as did infant and child mortality. Nutrition outcomes improved and so
did access to education. The gross enrollment rate for primary education, for instance, increased from
98 percent to 122 percent between 2004 and 2014. Additionally, the poor are more exposed than
average to the impact of floods which can be exacerbated by the effects of climate change. 3

21.     Lacking employment prospects make it all the more difficult to escape poverty. Creation of
good jobs, particularly for the poor, has been limited in the current economic structure. Only 13
percent of jobs are salaried positions that typically offer higher earnings and greater security. As two
out of three people with salaried jobs have secondary education or higher, most of the poor do not
possess the qualifications to compete for such posts. Furthermore, most wage workers come from
households in which a parent is also employed in the formal sector. As a result, a majority of the
workforce must resort to self-employment (81 percent of jobs), predominantly informal in nature with
lower average earnings

22.      The rural-urban poverty divide. The majority of the poor (65 percent) live in rural areas,
where they are engaged in smallholder agriculture. Most rural poor are smallholders, cultivating maize
and yam for own consumption and sale; and cotton, oil-palm, and fruits and vegetables as cash crops.
Farming typically happens under rain-fed conditions using traditional means of production such as the
hoe or oxen. The fraction of poor residing in urban areas is relatively high at 35 percent, about three
times higher than what is found in other countries in the region. The urban poor are largely engaged
in the informal sector, particularly informal (fuel) trade with Nigeria.

23.    Lagging regions and the north-south divide. The highest poverty rates are found in the
remote departments in the north. Poverty tends to increase from south to north, albeit not uniformly.
The northernmost departments have a poverty incidence of 60 percent or higher, but some
departments in the south have comparable poverty rates, such as Couffo (57.5 percent). Not only does

2 Official estimates present a different poverty trends with poverty falling from 37.5 percent in 2006 to 35.2 percent in
2010 and then increasing to 40.1 percent in 2015. This official trend is not used as it is based on noncomparable estimates
of poverty (see SCD for details).
3 Based on the World Bank publication “Shock Waves: Managing the Impacts of Climate Change on Poverty.”

https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/22787.


                                                             6
poverty incidence increase toward the north, the further one moves away from the coast, the less
services become accessible. This holds not only for water, electricity, sanitation, and mobile phone
coverage but also for social services such as health and education. Malnutrition rates are higher in the
north than in the south, families are larger, and the average number of years of education in the north
is lower than in the south. Nonetheless, the more heavily populated southern regions account for
roughly half of the poor, despite their generally lower poverty rates.

                                        Figure 1. Poverty Incidence


          Poverty incidence                       Number of poor                       Access to services
                                                (1 dot = 200 people)




Source: World Bank. 2016. The Geography of Welfare in Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, and Togo.


Drivers of Poverty and Development Challenges

Development Agenda

24.     The SCD specifies three intervention areas to serve as starting points for generating high-
quality employment opportunities and for reversing Benin’s slow progress toward twin goals
achievement. These are to promote (a) rapid economic growth with specific attention to labor-
intensive activities, (b) equitable access to opportunities and inclusion of the poor in the growth
process, and (c) sustainability over time. The SCD further identifies constraints to achieving success
within these areas: political economy and governance challenges, infrastructure weaknesses, trade
and competitiveness challenges, human capital and demographic pressures, gender imbalances, and
environmental and natural resource management. Taken together, these proposed intervention areas
and constraints serve as the basis for an agenda and logic for the Group’s development interventions.

Development priority 1: Promoting rapid economic growth

25.     Improving agricultural productivity. The SCD argues that Benin’s achievement of the twin
goals begins with realization of its vast agricultural potential. Benin is far from fully benefiting from its
vast agricultural potential. While its natural capital accounts show the total value of its cropland,
pastureland, and forests increasing by 50 percent over the past 20 years, given high population
growth, the per capita value has fallen by 15 percent. These values can be raised through rural
investments in capacity, technology, and value chains. Agricultural growth averages only 3.4 percent
a year, barely higher than the population growth rate of 3.2 percent. Productivity and yields have
stagnated and the aggregate agricultural trade balance remains in deficit. Transforming Benin’s


                                                     7
agricultural production presents a logical pathway to creating new jobs for a rapidly growing labor
force, especially in rural areas. Cotton, as an example, is produced in great quantity, yet less than 5
percent of this production is processed in-country and only a handful of textile companies exist.
Potential exists in several other areas as well, such as cashews, mangoes, pineapples and wood
products. A particular challenge in agriculture will be to mobilize the private sector as a source of
capital investment as well as entrepreneurship. An incomplete regulatory and policy reform process
and weaknesses in the governance system inhibit farmers’ access to key productive resources, such
as finance, water, land, and technology, and limit their ability to take advantage of the fast growing
urban, regional, and international markets that put a premium on product quality and safety.

26.     Addressing infrastructure challenges. The SCD identifies infrastructure challenges as a barrier
to rapid economic growth. Priority areas of infrastructure for the development agenda are:

        x    Electricity. Only 29 percent of Benin’s households have access to electricity. This low
             rate, which is below Sub-Saharan Africa’s average electrification rate of 35 percent, is
             compounded by deficiencies in quality of service.

        x    Water and sanitation. As of 2015, only 36 percent and 7 percent of the urban and rural
             population had access to improved sanitation facilities, respectively, while access to
             piped water in private residences remains low, particularly in rural areas, at only 5
             percent access. Another major issue related to water and sanitation is flooding,
             particularly in Cotonou and other coastal cities.

        x    Digital economy. The development of Benin’s digital economy could be transformative
             for the country, given its strategic location within West Africa and its access to existing
             submarine cable networks. With the right policies, the two forces of the digital
             economy—broadband infrastructure and digital services—will have significant direct
             and spillover benefits for the country.

        x    Transport infrastructure. Transport infrastructure and related services are key to Benin’s
             goals of improved trade and competitiveness, especially on its main transport and transit
             corridors to the hinterland and neighboring countries. For a small economy, such as
             Benin, further integrating regionally and tapping into external demand is critical to
             ensuring robust and resilient growth.

        x    Infrastructure resilience. Future infrastructure design and investments will be made
             with increased awareness of future climate change needs, including both measures to
             increase resilience to future climate shocks (across the transport, energy, urban and
             water sectors) and avoiding lock in effects that would hinder future efforts to reduce
             carbon emissions.

27.      Addressing governance challenges. The SCD identifies political economy and governance
challenges as the foremost constraint to unleashing economic growth. These challenges include a
weak business-enabling environment; elite capture, including in land access, bureaucratic burdens,
and corruption; a weak judicial system and environment of impunity; low social capital; gender
imbalances which impinge on growth; and PFM weaknesses, particularly in the areas of procurement
and PIM. These issues will be addressed through actions proposed by this CPF. A major area for World
Bank Group action is government effectiveness and accountability in public finance and public service
delivery. Among the most salient barriers to achieving the twin goals in Benin are government
ineffectiveness and low-quality basic services, notably in infrastructure. Allocating public resources
efficiently and equitably and ensuring public accountability in the delivery of quality services is




                                                  8
essential to improving opportunities for all citizens, especially disadvantaged groups. In this regard,
effective governance and management of public service delivery matter.

28.     Enabling competitiveness. The SCD also points to Benin’s lack of competitiveness in regional
and broader international markets. Benin would benefit enormously from a business-enabling
environment conducive to serving international and cross-border markets in a formal fashion, that is,
one conducive to attracting domestic, foreign (including Nigerian) firms, to establish a presence in
Benin. Improving the business environment for cross-border trade is an important part of the regional
trade integration agenda, yet cross-border traders, especially women, face a series of constraints.

Development priority 2: Equitable access to opportunities and inclusion of the poor in the growth
process

29.      Developing human capital. The SCD sees the underdevelopment of Benin’s human capital as
a critical constraint to achieving the twin goals. Although education indicators have improved, large
disparities between the poorest and wealthiest households persist, and learning outcomes are lower
for poorer households. Similarly, educational attainment of girls consistently lags that of boys. As
adults, lower educational attainment increases the probability of being poor. Furthermore, children
from poor families have higher rates of malnutrition and lower levels of access to adequate food, care,
water and sanitation, and health services. As malnutrition can interfere with early childhood
development, which in turn can affect prospects later in life, tackling malnutrition along with
improving equitable access to quality education and other basic services will be critical for improving
opportunities for disadvantaged groups.

30.     Improving educational outcomes. The SCD notes that despite improvements, Benin remains
a country with low levels of educational attainment. With adult literacy rates at approximately 50
percent (35 percent for women and 61 percent of men in 2011) and a high proportion of 19–24-year-
olds with less than 10 years of education, Benin’s active labor population lacks the educational profile
necessary to further reduce poverty, increase labor productivity, and create better jobs.

31.     Strengthening social protection, health and nutrition services. The SCD observes that lack of
adequate social protection in Benin has left households vulnerable to the impact of shocks including
from climate change. With limited savings and lack of insurance, the poor, facing disproportionate
constraints are also more exposed to shocks (bad weather, plummeting commodity prices, rising
consumer prices, accidents, disease) that can push households into or deeper into poverty. In this
respect, the coverage of social safety nets remains far below the needs of the poor and vulnerable.
Although pension and retirement savings institutions exist for employees in public sector and formal
private sector employment, past attempts at establishing these for workers in the informal sector
have failed. One aspect of social protection involves taking measures to protect children from
malnutrition. Child mortality and stunting prevalence remain high despite recent progress.

32.      Addressing gender imbalances. As the SCD notes, gender-based obstacles result in inequality
of opportunity between women and men. Many of these obstacles are interrelated and are
underpinned by pervasive social norms: young women drop out of school early to have children
and/or get married, which impedes their education, resulting in women occupying jobs that pay them
half the wage of men. This reduces their ability to save for investments in businesses or other
productive activities and reduces their bargaining power with their relationships, such as over
decisions about how many children to have and obtaining health care in a timely fashion, and makes
them more likely to experience intimate partner violence. Social norms also undermine any statutory
legal protections for gender equality, with customary practices meaning that women typically only
obtain secondary land use rights through a male spouse or relative, leading them to underinvest in
their land, with likely negative impacts on their agricultural productivity. Such gender gaps in resource



                                                   9
access and control, asset development, and human capital accumulation increase women’s
vulnerability to the negative impacts of climate change. This is due in part to women’s
disproportionate reliance on natural resource-based livelihoods, weak income diversification, and
gender-based time poverty that make recovery from climate shocks that much more difficult.

33.      Addressing regional disparities in well-being. As noted earlier, Benin’s lagging regions in
general exhibit lower levels of prosperity and access to public services the further one travels away
from the coast and toward the north. Recent Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA), The Geography of
Welfare in Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, and Togo, identified several measures that can help
alleviate such regional inequities, including an emphasis on development interventions which increase
agricultural productivity, budgetary transfers targeting the poorest regions, and focusing social
protections on lagging regions and pockets of poverty within them.

Development priority 3: Building resilience to economic and climate shocks

34.     Building resilience to external shocks at the community level. Benin’s poorest communities
are highly vulnerable to external shocks, whether they be economic or environmental (for example,
increasingly unpredictable rain patterns alternately creating water shortages and heavy flooding). A
key element of building the basis for sustainable and inclusive development will be to work with poor
communities in both rural areas and cities to increase their ability to respond to these shocks. A
particular challenge in Benin’s decentralized system of public service delivery is building its capacity
to deliver a range of social and infrastructure services.

35.      Building resilience to climate change. Benin’s achievement of poverty reduction and shared
prosperity relies heavily on agriculture, forestry, mining, and other natural resource-based activities.
Like most coastal countries in West Africa, Benin’s economic activity is concentrated in the coastal
zone, with the communes of Cotonou, Abomey-Calavi, and Sèmè-Podji making up about 57 percent
of urban GDP and 33 percent of national GDP. Risks to formal and informal economic activity centered
in communities on the coast will only increase with sea level rise, the intensity and frequency of
extreme weather events, and flooding. Heavy deforestation both contributes to and exacerbates the
effects of climate change in Benin. With inadequate energy supply, wood fuel and charcoal for cooking
represents the highest share—49 percent—of the country’s energy balance, accelerating the decline
of forest cover and exacerbating the effects of climate change. To effectively counter the increasingly
destructive environmental degradation and its economic and human toll will require multisectoral
action at local, national, and regional levels, requiring improvements in government capacity as well
as regional coordination mechanisms.

III.    WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

Government Program and Medium-Term Strategy

36.     The Government’s PAG is an ambitious program designed to rapidly increase growth and
social well-being in the country. The PAG commits to an improvement in all dimensions of
governance—political, administrative, and economic—and to undertake ambitious reforms for
greater economic efficacity; more equitable access to public services, resources, and opportunities;
greater confidence between communities, the private sector, and individuals; and greater
participation of people in a democracy that is open and transparent. The PAG consists of three pillars:
(a) consolidation of democracy, the rule of law, and good governance; (b) structural transformation
of the economy; and (c) improved social well-being. The GoB has affirmed its commitment to
implementing the SDGs and has ensured consistency between them and the PAG. It has established
an inter-ministerial committee and a Permanent Secretariat reporting to the Council of Ministers with
responsibility for implementation while ensuring stakeholder engagement.



                                                  10
37.      In October 2017, Benin became a full participant in the G20 Compact with Africa (CWA)
Initiative 4 in the hope of crowding in private sector financing of the PAG, 2016–2021. In the
prospectus presented to G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors on October 12–13, 2017,
in Washington, DC, Benin plans to strengthen the macroeconomic framework through reforms in the
areas of domestic resource mobilization, the efficiency of public spending, and public debt
management. The country also plans to improve the business climate through implementation of a
special economic zone, promotion of a platform for private investment, and continuing improvement
of Doing Business indicators.

Proposed WBG Country Partnership Framework

Lessons from CPS Completion Review, IEG Evaluation, and Stakeholder Consultations

Completion and Learning Review

38.      The Completion and Learning Review for the Benin Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
FY13–FY18 (see Annex 2) rated World Bank performance as Moderately Satisfactory, although most
of the CPS’ performance indicators were achieved. The CPS program was organized into three pillars:
A ‘Foundation Pillar’ focused on Governance and Public-Sector Capacity was rated Moderately
Satisfactory due to the partial achievement of expected results in improved public sector capacity. A
second pillar focused on Sustainable Growth, Competitiveness, and Employment was rated
Satisfactory, reflecting substantial achievement of results in the areas of transport and port services,
access to information and communication technology (ICT) services, enhanced business environment,
agricultural productivity and diversification, natural resource management, and labor skills for youth.
A third pillar focused on Improving Service Delivery and Social Inclusion was also rated Satisfactory,
with full achievement of results in the areas of flood protection in urban areas, increased access to
safety nets, improved access to primary education, and improved access to health and nutrition
services. Much of the proposed CPF program detailed below builds upon the successes of the CPS
program that preceded it while simultaneously bringing to bear a range of new initiatives and
instruments that have been developed since the CPS approval in 2013.

39.     Lessons learned and World Bank Group response. A number of lessons learned during CPS
implementation will be taken into account as new operations are being developed during the CPF
period. The main lessons learned according to the Completion and Learning Review (CLR) along with
proactive measures that are being mainstreamed within operations include the following:

         x     Weak governance and insufficient Government commitment undermined the policy
               reform program in important areas such as PFM and difficult policy reforms such as
               electricity. Improving governance is a foundational, cross-cutting objective in the CPF
               program which will be implemented through a variety of measures at both the national
               and subnational level (specific measures will be identified under each of the CPF
               objectives discussed below). The World Bank Group, in collaboration with other
               partners, will continue to address governance issues—including weak institutions and
               systems, long-standing unethical behaviors, and limited progress with fiscal
               decentralization—in the policy reform dialogue. Up front, in the design of CPF
               interventions, consideration will be given to using a governance filter, especially in
               sectors where opportunities for corrupt practices are prevalent. The ongoing Public
               Investment and Governance project addresses improvements to public expenditure

4Germany’s presidency of the G20 in 2017 introduced a new initiative for supporting African countries’ development: The
G20 CWA. The compact brings together interested African countries with the World Bank Group, the IMF, the African
Development Bank (AfDB), and other multilateral and bilateral partners to develop and support policies and actions that
are essential for attracting private investment.


                                                          11
             planning, management, and evaluation and supports systems needed to remove
             opportunities for corruption. Citizen engagement, which is hardwired into CPF
             operations through scorecards, and beneficiary engagement during supervision
             missions, will be emphasized.

        x    A positive lesson learned involves WBG support to investment programs targeting the
             poor. These programs have yielded results, leading to meaningful policy and
             institutional changes in affected sectors; this is important in light of the need to
             redouble the Bank’s efforts to address poverty. Experience with the 2013–2018
             program shows that investment projects that directly assist the poor in such areas as
             agricultural diversification, community development, and health and nutrition have
             yielded quantifiable results, and that those programs have led to important policy and
             institutional reforms (creation of the safety net system, community-based management
             systems, strengthening the planning and execution of programs in the Ministry of
             Agriculture, PPP arrangements). Analytical work on poverty carried out during this
             period points to the need to redouble World Bank efforts to alleviate persistent high
             poverty levels, and address spatial inequalities. The Group’s operations designed to
             directly target poverty could, for example, be put through a filter to measure the
             sustainability and replicability of activities being undertaken and the projects’ impact on
             institutional reforms in the areas covered by them. In addition, the filters could ensure
             efficient management of funds. Programs addressing poverty would need to spell out
             spatial inequality issues by (a) supporting activities that are of particular relevance to
             livelihoods in the poorest regions; (b) rolling out reforms and investments in the poorest
             regions first (being planned for future World Bank-supported health, education, and
             access to electricity ͒programs); and (c) focusing on particularly vulnerable groups.

        x    It is important to quickly respond to changes in the country context and to monitor the
             program in a timely manner. The World Bank Group team will continue to closely
             monitor the CPF program and individual operations. Portfolio review meetings will be
             held on a regular basis with the GoB to respond quickly to emerging problems. A
             Performance and Learning Review (PLR) will be undertaken at the CPF midpoint and
             appropriate action will be taken to correct course wherever needed.

        x    The World Bank Group is most effective when all its institutions work together. This
             CPF details ways in which IDA, International Finance Corporation (IFC), and Multilateral
             Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) optimize the scope provided by IDA 18’s mandate
             to maximize cross-World Bank Group synergies, particularly in maximizing finance for
             development in agriculture, infrastructure, finance, and building and enabling
             environment for the private sector.

Consultations

40.     Consultations were held during February 15–23, 2018, in five of Benin’s twelve departments
to explore the views of key participants on the objectives and proposed interventions of the CPF.
Participants included representatives from both national- and local-level governments, the private
sector, civil society, donors, and project beneficiaries. They unanimously acknowledged the CPF’s
alignment with Benin’s PAG, as well as the relevance of the proposed interventions for addressing the
population’s needs. The Government expressed eagerness to pursue options to deploy the CPF’s new
and innovative approaches. The private sector emphasized the need for support to regulatory
reforms, infrastructure improvements and assistance in developing national and international
partnerships for capital investment and market development. They highlighted concerns related to
the negative impact of the Nigerian economy, but recognized its considerable market opportunities.


                                                  12
They cited persistent lack of competitiveness, due to noncompetitive factors of production, difficult
access to finance, high energy costs, lagging public-private dialogue, poor human capital, and the lack
of incentives to develop agricultural value chains. Civil society requested more participation in
development planning, implementation, and monitoring. They also appreciated the full inclusion of
women as project beneficiaries and requested more deliberate attention in World Bank Group
interventions to girls’ education, early marriage and early pregnancies, and women’s access to land.
As one female project beneficiary stated, “For the first time, I feel as if I am being listened to and taken
seriously.” The World Bank Group team assured participants of the World Bank Group’s commitment
to pursuing agile options for addressing these issues through CPF implementation.

Overview of World Bank Group Strategy

41.      The pathways toward reducing extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity, which are
laid out in the SCD, are woven into the CPF. The framework covers the FY19– FY23 time horizon, but
considers a longer-term vision for Benin’s development. The CPF will respond to selective priorities
presented in the Government’s PAG. A framework encapsulating the CPF’s core objectives and
modalities is depicted in Figure 2.

                                 Figure 2. Country Partnership Framework




Implementing the FY18-23 Country Partnership Framework

Guiding Principles

42.     The proposed CPF supports the GoB’s ambitious program of improved governance,
structural transformation of the economy, and improving social well-being through investment in


                                                    13
human capital. The CPF has been developed jointly by IDA with IFC and MIGA, and seeks wherever
possible to develop robust synergies across the World Bank Group.

        x    IDA’s role. Consistent with the selectivity filters discussed in the next paragraph, IDA will
             act as platform, knowledge generator, and financier of last resort. Its support will also
             be directed toward the use of seed and preparatory funding, especially for large
             transformational operations, whereas the program more generally will be based on (a)
             how the Government can leverage its own resources for its priority development targets,
             (b) crowding in international and domestic private sector financing, and (c) utilization of
             innovative financing models, including public-private partnerships (PPPs) and
             guarantees. Policy reforms in the CPF’s three focus areas will be supported by a series of
             Development Policy Operations (DPOs) designed to support achievement of the
             Government’s reform objectives.

        x    IFC’s role. Complementary to the World Bank approach, IFC focuses on promoting
             private sector development in Benin, with a focus on the financial, power, telecoms, and
             agribusiness sectors. IFC’s new strategy, IFC 3.0, is particularly relevant for Benin. It will
             underpin the World Bank Group’s systematic and sequenced approach to market
             creation, scale up private sector solutions and catalyze private capital. These activities
             complement the activities proposed under Benin’s G20 CWA plan.

        x    MIGA’s role. MIGA will also seek to mobilize sustainable foreign investment for Benin by
             deploying its political risk insurance products. This could be done, as needed, through
             use of the MIGA Guarantee Facility under the IDA18 Private Sector Window (PSW).

43.     Selectivity filters. The World Bank Group’s approach derives from three selectivity filters: (a)
the priorities identified by the SCD to help Benin reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity, (b)
alignment with the Government’s own development program and requests for World Bank Group
support, and (c) the World Bank Group’s comparative advantage, as understood from the lessons of
our experience, from client feedback, and in terms of positioning compared with other donors.

        x    Selectivity Filter 1: Alignment with the SCD. The CPF builds upon the SCD’s findings and
             recommendations. It is broadly aligned with the SCD’s six ‘Pathways’ toward achieving
             higher productivity jobs with inclusiveness and sustainability, although the intensity and
             modality of World Bank Group engagement within each area will vary depending on the
             two other selectivity filters (see table 2). It also directly addresses each of the SCD’s eight
             ‘binding constraints’ that hinder Benin from achieving the twin goals (see Table 3).

        x    Selectivity Filter 2: Alignment with the Government’s own development program and
             requests for World Bank Group support. The World Bank’s dialogue with the GoB
             centers on the PAG’s development strategy (see Table 4), and consultations confirm its
             satisfaction that the proposed program is aligned with its critical priorities. In particular,
             the Group’s program complements GoB’s efforts to achieve structural transformation of
             the economy, improved governance, and investment in human capital.

        x    Selectivity Filter 3: World Bank Group comparative advantage. The Group will refine its
             selective handling of the priorities identified in SCD. An ongoing partner-led review of
             donor strategies and interventions in Benin will provide the Group with a timely
             opportunity to hone its support to specific PAG priorities and ensure that collective
             donor efforts build on synergies as determined by the experience and resources of each
             agency. The CLR, the outcomes of consultations, and a countrywide client survey will
             help further define the areas of the Group’s comparative advantage.


                                                   14
       x     The SDGs and IDA 18 Special Themes. The proposed CPF Country Program has also been
             designed to ensure consistency with both the SDGs and IDA18 themes. These will be
             identified in the following paragraphs in relation to each Country Program objective.

44.      Areas in which the World Bank Group will not be engaging. Consistent with these selectivity
principles, the CPF does not envisage engagement in some areas. For example, no IDA investment is
envisaged in core justice sector reform, while the World Bank Group is open to considering advisory
support to complement past investments in the establishment of commercial courts for enhanced
competitiveness. Justice reforms are, besides, supported by France. No large-scale IDA operation in
the banking and financial services sector is planned at this time, whereas the World Bank Group will
prioritize financial inclusion for small and medium enterprise (SME) development and
entrepreneurship growth and advisory support on savings, credit, insurance, and consumer
protection. No IDA investment in mining is planned, as it is not an area where the Government
currently seeks World Bank Group support.

45.     Some recurring themes in the CPF. The CPF program addresses eight objectives organized
within three broad focus areas (see Table 5). While each of these is unique in terms of the
development challenges faced and the World Bank Group’s operational response, there are several
important themes that recur across a number of the objectives:

Foundational themes

       x     Building capacity for improved governance. Governance and institutional capacity are
             an IDA18 Special Theme, which recognizes that this issue touches the World Bank
             Group’s work in all sectors—serving as a foundation for IDA’s effective investment in
             growth, resilience, and opportunities. The PAG highlights building capacity for improved
             governance as a top priority, while the SCD considers political economy and governance
             issues to be the highest priority among all constraints to achieving the twin goals for the
             Group to address. As such, the CPF program considers building capacity for improved
             governance a foundational theme and proposes integrating in all its investment
             operations components designed to improve the regulatory framework and
             implementation capacity of government agencies, civil society, communities, and the
             private sector alike.

       x     Women’s economic empowerment. Gender and development is also an IDA 18 Special
             Theme, which emphasizes that closing gaps between men and women is a complex task
             spanning multiple sectors and almost always requiring sustained effort over time. The
             SCD highlights weak women’s economic empowerment as a significant constraint to
             achieving the twin goals, and is of such importance to achieving the twin goals that it is
             treated as a foundational theme in the CPF. The World Bank Group seeks wherever
             possible to empower Benin’s women economically in its operations, as will be reflected
             across the specific objectives discussed below. In addition, a range of gender analytical
             work has informed and will continue to inform this CPF. This analytical work covers
             multiple sectors, as required by OP/BP 4.20. In addition, to strengthen the analytical
             foundations on which the CPF’s approach to gender is based, the team will explore
             options for integrating gender into new ASA, where relevant, including the Support to
             Poverty Analysis and Monitoring and Evaluation. The team will also explore more options
             for detailed gender analysis in sectors where there are key knowledge gaps.




                                                  15
Other recurring themes

       x    MFD. Both the PAG and the SCD emphasize the critical importance of maximizing private
            sector investment for Benin to achieve its targets. The World Bank Group fully endorses
            the MFD principles of (a) promoting private sector-minded regulatory reforms; (b)
            promoting upstream engagement with the private sector; (c) providing targeted
            advisory, blended finance, and PPP solutions; and (d) fostering joint interventions in
            selected sectors. Thus, the CPF program will orient World Bank engagements to
            accompany IFC interventions designed to build momentum for private sector-oriented
            reforms, address the key impediments to private sector development, and raise
            domestic private sector capacities. IFC’s Creating Markets Advisory Window funding
            could be mobilized to build private sector capacity where it is most needed, including in
            agriculture and infrastructure.

       x    Climate co-benefits. Also an IDA18 Special Theme, climate change constitutes a
            particular threat to coastal and agriculture-dependent Benin. As stressed by the SCD, the
            World Bank Group is well positioned to help Benin achieve its targets while fostering
            inclusive development that builds resilience to climate change and reduces the risk of its
            citizens slipping back into poverty. Addressing disaster and climate-related risks is the
            subject of an entire objective (8) but the CPF also proposes to address climate issues by
            mainstreaming them in investment operations wherever possible, as is indicated below.

       x    Citizen participation. Citizen participation and oversight for purposes of accountability
            and transparency are critical elements of any approach to improved governance as well
            as empowering women, the two foundational themes discussed earlier. As such, this will
            also appear as a recurring theme in the proposed CPF program, reflecting the extent to
            which it is being mainstreamed within World Bank Group operations.

       x    Regional integration. In keeping with the Africa Region’s Regional Integration and
            Cooperation Assistance Strategy, the World Bank Group’s Benin program builds on cross-
            border synergies and regional initiatives wherever there is an opportunity. As will be
            discussed below, for example, climate change is an issue that requires a high degree of
            regional cooperation and coordination, and the World Bank Group’s operational
            response (see Objective 8) draws upon regional programs while nonetheless continuing
            to tailor Benin-specific components to local needs. The World Bank Group will continue
            seeking opportunities to apply regional initiatives wherever they might apply.

       x    An emphasis on reducing inequities in prosperity and inclusion among regions. While
            not explicitly flagged in the discussion of each of the objectives below, the CPF program
            implicitly applies the recommendations of the aforementioned ASA, The Geography of
            Welfare in Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire and Togo, for redressing regional inequities
            by focusing much of the Group’s portfolio on improving agricultural productivity and
            expanding social safety net coverage.




                                                16
                                                 Table 2. SCD Proposed Pathways, Actions, and CPF Operational Response
                                                   B. Shift the focus on   C. Increase efficiency
                                                   serving the Nigerian     in the transport and
                                                                                                                                                         F. Strengthen and
                             A. Alleviate            market from one          logistics sector to
                                                                                                     D. Strengthen the       E. Invest in women’s            improve the
   SCD Proposed             constraints to           based on informal     capitalize on the Port
                                                                                                     delivery of public           literacy and              coverage and
      Actions                agricultural          trading to one based        of Cotonou and
                                                                                                          services             education efforts         targeting of social
                         productivity growth         on formal, value-     Benin’s natural trade
                                                                                                                                                              safety nets
                                                   added products and          corridors to the
                                                          services                   north
Carry into CPF?         Yes. The GoB makes a      Yes, with caveats.       Yes, with conditions     Yes. The GoB             Yes. Both a GoB         Yes. Both a GoB
                        priority in the PAG       The World Bank           under discussion with    (through the PAG)        priority and within     priority and within
                        and has taken key         Group is helping the     the GoB. Previous        prioritizes improved     World Bank’s            World Bank Group’s
                        reforms allowing first    GoB promote cross-       World Bank Group         service delivery,        experience. This is     experience. World
                        DPO to move               border trade. More       operations in support    particularly in          one key component,      Bank Group has long
                        forward. Large            instruments are          of the port not fully    education and health     among others,           experience in social
                        ongoing World Bank        available; however,      effective. Regulatory    sectors. World Bank      provided for under      safety net issues such
                        Group portfolio that      there are risks in       reforms necessary        Group has long           the ‘foundational’      as pensions and
                        is generating positive    overdependence on        before major             experience in these      (cross-cutting) theme   conditional cash
                        results, with lessons     Nigerian markets due     investments in road      sectors in Benin and     of women’s              transfers (CCTs)
                        learned being taken       to possibility of        and rail                 globally and with        economic                globally and
                        into consideration in     economic change          infrastructure           next generation          empowerment.            operations are under
                        designing future          adversely affecting                               operations under                                 advanced discussion
                        interventions             Terms of Trade with                               discussion with the                              with the GoB.
                                                  Benin.                                            GoB.
                                                    Table 3. Constraints to Achieving Twin Goals Identified by the SCD
                                                                                    J. Human
                    G. Political                                                                                                                               N. Lagging
    SCD                                                                               capital           K. Gender       L. Population      M. Lack of
                  economy, elite           H. Poor                                                                                                           environmental
Constraints to                                               I. Constraints to    weaknesses,       imbalances and       growth and        adequate
                   capture, and        Infrastructure                                                                                                         and natural
Achieving the                                                competitiveness       especially       a lack of female    demographic          social
                       poor               services                                                                                                             resource
 Twin Goals                                                                        among the         empowerment          pressures        protection
                   governance                                                                                                                                 management
                                                                                     poorest
Addressed by      Yes. Improving    Yes. Improving           Yes. Addressing     Yes. Addressing    Yes. Women’s       Yes. In           Yes. Social         Yes. Improving
CPF?              governance is a   infrastructure is a      regulatory and      human capital      economic           particular        protection is       coastal areas
                  ‘foundational’    major area of World      infrastructural     weaknesses is      empowerment        through                               management is



                                                                                    17
                                                                                     J. Human
                     G. Political                                                                                                                               N. Lagging
     SCD                                                                               capital         K. Gender        L. Population      M. Lack of
                   economy, elite           H. Poor                                                                                                           environmental
 Constraints to                                              I. Constraints to    weaknesses,      imbalances and        growth and        adequate
                    capture, and        Infrastructure                                                                                                         and natural
 Achieving the                                               competitiveness        especially     a lack of female     demographic          social
                        poor               services                                                                                                             resource
  Twin Goals                                                                        among the       empowerment           pressures        protection
                    governance                                                                                                                                 management
                                                                                      poorest
                  theme that is      Bank Group              constraints to      a focus area of   is a                emphasizing       an objective of      an objective of
                  addressed up       comparative             competitiveness     the CPF, with     ‘foundational’      health and        the CPF.             the CPF.
                  front as a         advantage, with         is a major          operational       theme that is       education for
                  priority           ongoing and             objective of the    responses         addressed up        women
                  component of       proposed operations     CPF.                planned in        front as a
                  World Bank         in areas of energy,                         education,        priority
                  Group              telecommunications,                         health, and       component of
                  operations         ICT, water and                              improved          World Bank
                  planned under      sanitation, and                             social services   Group
                  the CPF.           roads.                                      delivery.         operations
                                                                                                   planned under
                                                                                                   the CPF.
                              Table 4. Alignment of Government Priorities, World Bank Group Comparative Advantage and CPF Objectives
    SCD
                            Government Priorities                      World Bank Group Comparative Advantage                              CPF Objective
  Priority
A. G. I. K.   The agriculture sector will be the fulcrum of         Long experience working on agriculture sector in    Fostering agricultural productivity
              economic development. Emphasis is on                  Benin. The World Bank Group is the leader in
              developing several high-value crops through           dialogue with the Government on agriculture,
              research, extension services and attracting private   with other donors in the sector including the
              investment.                                           AfDB, International Fund for Agricultural
                                                                    Development, the European Union (EU), the
                                                                    Belgian Cooperation, the French Cooperation, the
                                                                    German Cooperation, and U.S. Agency for
                                                                    International Development (USAID).
B. C. G. K.   Transport, energy, and ICT are prerequisites for      The World Bank Group has long experience            Improving the quality of infrastructure
              relaunching economic growth. Access to clean          working with the GoB on infrastructure issues,
              water is a top priority for social well-being.        with increasing support through integrated
                                                                    regional infrastructure operations. In the



                                                                                    18
    SCD
                           Government Priorities                     World Bank Group Comparative Advantage                              CPF Objective
  Priority
                                                                  electricity sector, the World Bank is working with
                                                                  the U.S. Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC)
                                                                  in complementary fashion alongside the French
                                                                  Development Agency (Agence Française de
                                                                  Développement, AFD) in support of the
                                                                  Government’s Action Plan for increased energy
                                                                  generation.
D. G.         The PAG calls for an improved regulatory            The World Bank Group has an established policy       Improving governance in management of public
              environment for PPP, the modernization and          dialogue with the GoB on fiscal management and       finances
              professionalization of public procurement, greater PIM and is closely collaborating with the IMF on
              budget transparency, and fiscal measures that       these topics to support sustainable economic
              promote private investment.                         growth.
B. I.         Economic diplomacy will be marshalled to            The World Bank Group has supported                   Improving the environment for private sector
              improve the conditions of market transactions       international competitiveness over a long period,    investment and competitiveness
              between Benin and Nigeria and ensure that formal particularly in the area of tourism. IFC has long
              trade agreements are respected. Promoting           experience building the business environment.
              tourism is a top priority.
E. J. K.      Improvement of national education system, in        The World Bank Group has long experience in          Improving quality and relevance of education and
              particular vocational education, is a top priority. funding education improvements in Benin and          professional training for strengthened job creation
                                                                  globally. The challenge of quality of education is
                                                                  being addressed at the primary and lower
                                                                  secondary education by two ongoing projects
                                                                  funded by donors: (a) Pooled Fund (Fonds
                                                                  Commun Budgétaire-Partenariat Mondial pour
                                                                  l’Education) and (b) the AFD-funded project
                                                                  supporting lower secondary education reform.
E. F. K. L.   Reducing vulnerability and promoting opportunity The World Bank Group has piloted Benin’s first          Improving social protection systems
M.            through productive social safety net programs is    social safety net program of notable size and has
              critical for poverty reduction and shared           supported identification of poor and extreme poor
              prosperity. Weak disease surveillance systems       households and a national social registry.




                                                                                  19
   SCD
                           Government Priorities                     World Bank Group Comparative Advantage                             CPF Objective
 Priority
             increase the risk of a major health epidemic
             outbreak.
G.           Improving governance generally is a top priority    The World Bank Group has long experience             Building resilience at the community level
             for the GoB.                                        working on governance and capacity building in
                                                                 Benin and globally.
N.           The PAG highlights the need for action and priority The World Bank Group is a leader in support for      Reducing vulnerability to climate-related threats
             investments in (a) strengthening of overall         prevention of and adjustment to climate- and         in forestry, agriculture, and coastal zones
             resilience to climate change, (b) sustainable       epidemic-related risks having provided billions of
             management of forest resources and biodiversity, dollars of investment financing in Africa and
             (c) program development to fight coastal erosion, throughout the globe. Its experience in assisting
             and (d) improving of the livelihoods of local       countries in West Africa to address climate and
             communities.                                        epidemic risks is broad, ranging from technical
                                                                 assistance (TA) to investment financing.



                                                                  Table 5. CPF Areas of Engagement


Focus Area 1: Structural Transformation for                                                                       Focus Area 3: Increasing Resilience and Reducing
                                                        Focus Area 2: Investing in Human Capital
Strengthened Competitiveness and Productivity                                                                     Disaster and Climate-Related Risks
Objective 1: Fostering agricultural productivity        Objective 5: Improving relevance of education and         Objective 7: Building resilience at the community level
                                                        professional training for strengthened job creation
Objective 2: Improving the quality of infrastructure    Objective 6: Improving social protection systems          Objective 8: Reducing vulnerability to climate-related
                                                                                                                  threats
Objective 3: Improving governance in management of
public finances
Objective 4: Improving the environment for private
sector investment and competitiveness




                                                                                  20
Focus Area 1: Structural Transformation for Competitiveness and Productivity

46.      The four objectives encompassed within this focus area aim to help Benin achieve the
structural transformation of its economy that is a top priority for action both in the SCD and the
PAG. Both documents emphasize the need to enhance agricultural productivity, improve the quality
of infrastructure, increase the efficiency and accountability of public sector management, and make
Benin more competitive in international markets. The CPF proposes an operational response to these
challenges according to an intervention logic that is set forth for each objective as follows.

Objective 1: Fostering agricultural productivity

 Relevant Sustainable Development Goals:
 SDG 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere
 SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture
 SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
 SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth; full and productive employment; and
 decent work for all
 SDG 13: Combat climate change
 Relevant IDA18 Special Themes:
 Special Themes 1: Jobs and Economic Transformation; 2: Gender and Development; 3: Climate change;
 5: Governance and Institutions

47.      Both the SCD and PAG prioritize the need to realize Benin’s considerable agricultural potential
as the path of least resistance toward overall economic growth, production of stable employment,
and poverty reduction. The majority of Beninese households are involved in agriculture and are also
heavily dependent on the sector from a consumption perspective. Increasing agricultural productivity
will not only foster growth and employment but can also have a direct and important welfare effect
on household. Gender imbalances also figure prominently in agriculture, presenting opportunities for
proactive interventions to foster women’s economic empowerment. Finally, as the CLR notes, the
World Bank Group has a long and successful track record of operations in Benin’s agricultural sector
which serve as a bedrock of knowledge and experience upon which to build. The CPF program focused
on fostering agricultural competitiveness and diversity would involve the following steps:

        x     Promoting agricultural innovation for higher productivity. As the SCD documents, a
              major constraint to productivity is the lack of producer access to innovative technologies
              and quality inputs. Through the Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project
              (PADA) the World Bank is supporting large-scale adoption of improved agricultural
              technologies, including climate-smart production systems, development of production
              and market infrastructure to enhance productivity through efficient water management,
              reduction of postharvest losses and better access to market through warehouses and
              other facilities, improved value chain coordination, and access to finance. In addition,
              the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP) is promoting the adoption of
              agricultural innovation and access to improved inputs through support to agricultural
              research, extension, and advisory services. The project also supports mechanization by
              promoting access to equipment and labor-saving technologies for women.

        x     Developing human capital for agriculture. Better technical skills are critical for
              agricultural producers to meet the challenge of new technologies. The Centers of
              Excellence project (which aims to produce a cadre with high-level technical skills and
              promote research of international standing) is entering a second phase of



                                                    21
            implementation during which increased emphasis will be given to the agricultural sector.
            Furthermore, the proposed Education for Employability Project will focus on producing
            mid-level technicians and expertise for the agricultural sector.

       x    MFD in agriculture. Both the SCD and PAG stress the need to mobilize private sector
            financing for agriculture. Doing so will first require strengthening the investment climate.
            IFC recently finalized a study of value chains—in cashew, cotton, rice, maize, cassava,
            livestock/milk, poultry/eggs, pineapple, horticulture, soya, fisheries, and shea butter—
            to identify new business development opportunities and explore opportunities to
            support agriculture SMEs. The World Bank’s study Value Chains in Agriculture will
            identify policies that better support segmented market product and service
            combinations to be more competitive in export markets. Furthermore, a proposed
            diagnostic of the entrepreneurship ecosystem will identify key interventions needed to
            spur entrepreneurship in Benin’s agribusiness. Another constraint to agricultural
            productivity is poor or nonexistent access to financing for producers. IFC is working to
            improve access to finance for agribusiness operators through existing trade finance lines
            with Ecobank and Diamond Bank. The Risk Sharing Facility (RSF) with Bank of Africa
            (using IDA funds for the first loss portion) to support SMEs operating along the tourism
            and other value chains is also expected to include an agribusiness segment. IFC will
            continue to (i) seek opportunities like these, through financial intermediaries, to support
            SMEs and the agribusiness sector, and (ii) seek direct financing opportunities to support
            large-scale operations such as commercial farming and food processing.

       x    Climate co-benefits: Addressing risks to agriculture. An increasingly prevalent
            constraint to agricultural productivity is weather- and climate-related risk. The CPF will
            support (see Objective 8) improved understanding of these risks to agricultural
            productivity and approaches to improve diversity and production in a changing climate
            to integrate weather and climate-related information in agricultural practices and
            extension services to female and male farmers. In addition, World Bank Group dialogue
            with the GoB will include ways to assist achievement of Benin’s Nationally Determined
            Contribution (NDC) to the Paris Agreement, including measures to reduce carbon
            emissions with a focus on limiting the burning of grasslands and agricultural wastes.

       x    Extending connectivity to the agricultural sector. Improved access to digital services can
            generate numerous benefits for producers. The World Bank’s Digital Services for
            Sustainable Development Project will extend ICT connectivity in rural areas, providing
            digital solutions to smallholders for selected crops that will increase crop yields, increase
            volumes of sales, reduce postharvest loss, and improve market links. The project will also
            help smallholders obtain financing through mobile banking and by leveraging ICT to
            develop cheap and reliable tools to register land and deliver land certificates.

       x    Citizen participation. PADA will strengthen the capacity of civil society and producers’
            organizations for better citizen engagement and increased participation in the policy
            dialogue and decision making within the sector while providing TA to support the
            improvement of the legal and regulatory environment for the targeted value chains.

Foundational themes

       x    Building capacity for governance in agriculture. The SCD considers governance issues to
            be among the most fundamental constraints to transformation of Benin’s agriculture. Of
            particular importance to agribusiness and processing are access to land in rural areas
            and near production areas, and quality, safety, and standards testing facilities. The CPF


                                                  22
              supports the GoB’s efforts to develop its institutional and regulatory framework for
              improving agricultural productivity. The Fiscal Reform and Growth Development Policy
              Credit series supports the GoB’s new institutional framework for agricultural
              development, characterized by the establishment of seven new agricultural
              development poles (combining existing agroecological zones). PADA is working to
              improve capacity within the Ministry of Agriculture to coordinate the agricultural sector.
              Meanwhile, the ASA report Review of Land Tenure Policy in Benin has assessed Benin’s
              policy and legal framework governing land in order to provide a basis for future World
              Bank engagement on land policy issues there.

        x     Women’s economic empowerment in agriculture. Ensuring that women benefit from
              improvements in agricultural competitiveness is emphasized in the proposed CPF
              program. PADA identifies the roles of women in targeted value chains and aims to ensure
              women’s full participation in those activities where they play an important role.
              Meanwhile, the Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development Project will enhance
              gender equality and women’s empowerment by allowing women smallholders to access
              information of importance to their productive and community roles and by supporting
              women-owned enterprises in the development of ICT services for rural communities.



Objective 2: Improving the quality of infrastructure

 Relevant Sustainable Development Goals:
 SDG 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization, and foster innovation
 SDG 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern energy for all
 SDG 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all
 SDG 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable
 SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
 SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth; full and productive employment; and
 decent work for all
 SDG 13: Combat climate change
 Relevant IDA18 Special Themes:
 Special Themes 1: Jobs and Economic Transformation; 2: Gender and Development; 3: Climate change

48.      The SCD and PAG both emphasize the importance of investing in infrastructure, whose poor
condition currently is a major impediment to achieving the twin goals. Where electricity is concerned,
a poorly functioning utility has created power shortages that hinder light manufacturing and limit
access especially to Benin’s poorest and rural populations. Lack of adequate water and sanitation
services infrastructure leaves only about half of the population with clean drinking water, produces
serious drainage and flooding problems, and exacerbates health issues. Inadequate road transport
infrastructure increases the costs of doing business and is a critical impediment to commerce and
economic growth overall. Expanding access to basic digital services can provide multiple economic
benefits to Benin’s population. As discussed in the CLR, the World Bank Group has considerable
experience in several areas infrastructure within Benin. In addition, the Group recently launched
regional initiatives (for example, in energy and transport) that allow it to develop operations within
Benin that benefit from the efficiencies and economic benefits that derive from their
conceptualization in a regional, cross-boundary context. Given the scope and importance of
overcoming infrastructure constraints in Benin, the World Bank Group is engaged in and designing
new operational responses in several sectors, as follows:



                                                        23
Electricity

        x     Increasing electrical generation capacity. Low capacity for electrical generation, coupled
              with poor functioning of the national electrical utility, constitutes major constraints to
              economic growth. The World Bank Group is supporting the GoB to improve both
              generation capacity and administration of the system to improve performance and
              access. The Energy Service Improvement Project is primarily focused upon improving the
              utility’s (Société Béninoise d'Energie Electrique [SBEE]) performance by contributing to
              reduced commercial and technical losses and by providing a road map for gradual power
              sector development while strengthening the key stakeholders’ capacity. The North
              Core/Dorsale Nord Regional Transmission Project (a West African Power Pool priority
              project for the creation of a regional power pool in West Africa) aims to connect Nigeria,
              Niger, Benin/Togo, and Burkina Faso, with a high-voltage 330-kV transmission line, and
              facilitate energy trade among its participants. For Benin, the project will increase the
              supply of electricity and the access to electricity in the northern part of the country.

        x     MFD for electricity generation. Private sector involvement could go far toward
              improving electricity generation, but it has faced regulatory barriers to participation. The
              Fiscal Reform and Growth Development Policy Credit series will help promote private
              sector investment in power generation by supporting a comprehensive framework for
              private sector participation and strengthening of the sector’s financial viability.
              Meanwhile, IFC has contributed to improving electricity generation by providing a €6
              million guarantee to generator suppliers APR and Aggreko on behalf of SBEE for
              emergency power. IFC and MIGA plan to explore long-term options to further contribute
              to electricity generation.

        x     Climate co-benefits: Producing greener energy. To counter severe deforestation due to
              overcutting for fuel consumption, the Energy Service Improvement Project will
              implement community-based forest management plans (described more fully under
              Objective 8). Under a proposed WAPP Power Pool TA to be provided by the Korea Green
              Growth Trust Fund, opportunities will be explored to include Benin in an initiative aiming
              to realize a greener, more resilient, sustainable, and accessible energy system and help
              achieve its renewable and greenhouse gas (GHG) targets. The activity would include an
              assessment of possible solutions for energy storage. In addition, the World Bank Group’s
              dialogue with the GoB will include ways to assist achievement of Benin’s NDC goals of
              greater electricity generation through usage of renewable and cleaner sources of energy
              including natural gas, hydroelectric, and solar power.

Foundational themes

        x     Building capacity for governance in the energy sector. Poor governance of the energy
              sector has been the principal obstacle to increasing electricity supply. The First Fiscal
              Reform and Growth Development Policy Credit and Energy Service Improvement Project
              both primarily focus on improving SBEE’s capacity to administer electricity generation
              and distribution and to manage arrears and improve revenue collection. The Fiscal
              Reform and Growth Development Policy Credit series also supports the Government’s
              strategy to restore the financial viability of the sector by clearing public sector arrears
              with SBEE, implementing initiatives that will help collect more revenue, and adopting a
              legal framework that will ensure the sustainable financial equilibrium of the sector.

        x     Women’s economic empowerment in the energy sector. The Energy Service
              Improvement Project includes a focus on connecting female-headed households to


                                                   24
            electricity by promoting women’s participation in decision making at the community
            level and their awareness of customer feedback mechanisms regarding their electricity
            connection and service. To this end, before and after surveys will examine the impact of
            the project on customer satisfaction by gender.

Water and Sanitation

       x    Increasing access to water and sanitation services in small towns. Poor management of
            water and sanitation services has become a major problem of public health and disease
            control. The Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage Project is supporting the GoB’s
            strategy to improve rural and small town water supply by strengthening stakeholders
            involved in water service delivery and contributing to funding water and sanitation
            system rehabilitation, construction, and expansion in selected municipalities. The CPF
            proposes to scale up this support through the Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access
            Program, a Program-for-Results intervention. The Program will target large-scale
            investments in piped rural water systems. It will also support the delegation of service
            delivery to professional private operators.

       x    MFD: Mobilizing private sector finance for water and sanitation. The Small Town Water
            Supply and Urban Septage Project establishes a Risk Sharing Facility to encourage
            national commercial banks to serve selected private sector operators by partially
            mitigating creditor risk through counter guarantees offered by the National Guarantee
            and Small and Medium Enterprise Assistance Fund. The Rural and Small Town Water TA
            Grant will assist the GoB to support decentralized local governments and the water
            domestic private sector in implementing, at scale, PPP subsidized concession models.

       x    Climate co-benefits: Reducing flooding in urban areas. Urban flooding has had a
            disruptive impact on Benin’s economy, as will be discussed under Objective 8. To address
            this, a proposed Urban Drainage and Sanitation Operation would support the GoB’s
            efforts to improve drainage, urban planning, and sanitation/environmental
            management in the greater Cotonou area. Using a multi-sectoral and multi-donor
            approach, the proposed operation would support storm water infrastructure and
            improved municipal management as a complement to road network development and
            rehabilitation to be financed by other donors.

Foundational themes

       x    Building capacity for governance in water and sanitation. The Streamlining Strategies
            and Capacity of Institutions for the SDGs in Rural and Small Town Water TA Grant
            supports municipalities and the private sector in scaling up the subsidized concession
            model in small towns, as well as its regulation at the national level. The Small Town
            Water Supply and Urban Septage Project focuses on improving municipal capacity to
            plan, monitor, and manage improvements to water and septage facilities.

       x    Women’s economic empowerment in water and sanitation. The Small Town Water
            Supply and Urban Septage Management Project will emphasize improving access to
            water for the poor, especially female-headed households, by introducing flexible water
            connection payments and the adoption of low-cost connections. The Benin Rural Water
            Supply Universal Access Program team is currently designing an approach to gender.




                                                25
Digital Economy

       x     Extending access to e-services. Mobile telephony and the Internet can contribute
             significantly to economic growth and productivity, yet in Benin these services are
             expensive and Internet coverage is poor, particularly in rural areas. The Digital Solutions
             for Sustainable Development Project will be one of the first in Sub-Saharan Africa to
             implement a national e-agriculture approach and to harness the potential of e-services
             in achieving greater efficiency in public service delivery and management for rural
             population and businesses. Accelerated development of local content, applications, and
             services both through public and private e-services (e.g. e-commerce platforms),
             including mobile applications, will strengthen the economic return for the digital
             infrastructure built by this project.

       x     MFD: Mobilizing private sector participation for digital solutions for development. The
             Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development Project adopts the MFD approach by
             identifying rural areas and digital services where market forces are sufficient to bridge
             the gap over a medium-term horizon, improving the institutional and regulatory
             environment to address market failure, and partnering with potential investors.

Foundational themes

       x     Building capacity for governance of the digital economy. The Digital Solutions for
             Sustainable Development Project’s approach of leveraging e-Government platforms to
             generate a demand for local content, applications, and service creation will be applicable
             to all other e-Government platforms such as e-Education or e-Health (thus sustaining
             other Group initiatives to help the GoB improve public sector management discussed in
             Objective 3). The project will also increase digital literacy of the rural population. Under
             the Digital Infrastructure Initiative, the World Bank and IFC are in preliminary discussions
             with Government on options for supporting the planned restructuring of the telecom
             operator, Benin Telecom, as well as the expansion of broadband infrastructure.

       x     Women’s economic empowerment in the digital economy. The Digital Solutions for
             Sustainable Development Project will enhance gender equality and empowerment by
             enabling women to access information relevant to their productive and community
             roles. It will target crops where women constitute the majority of the workforce.

Transport Infrastructure and Services

       x     Overcoming bottlenecks to efficient transportation. The poor condition of Benin’s road
             and rail transport systems increases the costs of commerce and is a dead weight on the
             economy. This is particularly problematic given Benin’s role as a regional transport and
             logistics hub. Preliminary dialogue is ongoing with the GoB on how the World Bank Group
             might support their efforts to address bottlenecks to trade, transport, and economic
             opportunities while strengthening sub-regional integration between Benin and Niger.

       x     MFD: Mobilizing private sector involvement in transportation. Private investments in
             transport are lagging in West Africa, apart from port concessions—and Benin is no
             exception. Any operation emerging from World Bank Group dialogue with the GoB on
             transport would address binding constraints in terms of physical infrastructure,
             regulatory and enabling environment with the objective of unlocking private solutions
             when appropriate. IFC will explore financing private enterprises in this sector, as well as




                                                  26
             support transport infrastructure. MIGA would also be ready to explore guarantees for
             any foreign investments in the transport sector.

Foundational themes

        x    Building capacity for governance in transport infrastructure and services. Several
             governance issues in the road transport sector would need to be addressed in any
             prospective operation. They include (a) professionalization of the trucking and transport
             industry, currently highly informal and antiquated; (b) targeting of noncompetitive
             practices (such as cartels, monopolies, and rent seeking); (c) harmonization of road
             transport rules and regulations between Benin and its neighbors; (d) improvement of
             transport policies on preservation of road assets, including maintenance and
             enforcement of axle load control; and (e) enhancing of port-city interactions to reduce
             port congestion and reduce traffic impacts, noise, and pollution on local residents.

Objective 3: Improving governance in management of public finances

 Relevant Sustainable Development Goals:
 SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
 SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth; full and productive employment;
 and decent work for all
 Relevant IDA-18 Special Themes:
 Special Themes 2: Gender and Development; 5: Governance and Institutions

49.     The SCD and PAG both consider addressing governance issues to be a top priority. Governance
weaknesses are perhaps the leading constraint to growth and are important to inclusion in terms of
equity in the delivery of public services and in ensuring equality in economic opportunity. They
constitute obstacles to achieving the twin goals within virtually all aspects of economic and social
development; hence, they are treated as a foundational, cross-cutting issue requiring World Bank
Group action targeting sector-specific issues under each objective of this CPF. The present objective
focuses on an overarching dimension of the governance problematic in Benin: the need for improved
public sector governance, particularly in PFM. As the CLR notes, the Group has extensive experience
working with the GoB on these issues. Greater capacity in public sector management will allow the
GoB to mobilize and apply resources with much improved impact and results in all areas of
development, particularly those aimed for in the PAG.

        x    Improving PFM. The CPF will support the GoB’s efforts to reduce its fiscal deficit and
             create the fiscal space necessary to achieve its development goals. The Fiscal Reform and
             Growth Development Policy Credit series will continue to support the GoB’s fiscal
             management to broaden the fiscal space needed for financing the PAG’s ambitious
             program. In parallel, analytical work and/or TA is planned in revenue, expenditure, and
             debt management to pave the way for effective fiscal policy reforms. Technical support
             may also be provided, in coordination with IMF, to improve Government’s capacity to
             adequately assess contingent liabilities linked to state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as well
             as PPP projects. Simultaneously, the Public Investment Management and Governance
             Support Project is providing TA to improve the Government’s capacity to manage PIM.
             It also addresses cross-cutting deficiencies in planning, budgeting, procurement, and
             monitoring and evaluation (M&E) to improve capital budget execution and results-based
             financing in order to operationalize similar reforms in selected sectors (water supply,
             electricity, and justice). During the CPF period, additional financing may be leveraged to
             scale up achievements and lessons from the Public Investment Management and
             Governance Support Project, expanding its support of planning, budgeting, and


                                                   27
             procurement to other PAG priority sectors. The CPF will also support analytical work to
             strengthen the impetus for decentralization, enhance the predictability of resource flows
             to communes, and create an enabling framework for community-driven development
             (CDD) through improved local governance (Objective 7).

        x    Strengthening fiduciary control systems. The CPF will continue to strengthen Benin’s
             fiduciary systems and capacity through TA and lending to professionalize and modernize
             procurement and accounting systems (including e-procurement) and internal/external
             controls. This support will include analytical work on procurement and financial
             management (FM) to capture and quantify processing and workflow processes and
             recommend improvements based on international best practice.

        x    Strengthening statistical capacity. During the CPF period, statistical capacity will be
             strengthened through investments in official statistics production, dissemination, and
             use. Support for statistical capacity building will either be provided through a stand-
             alone investment or be incorporated in another project or regional intervention.

        x    Citizen participation for improved accountability. A priority goal of both the SCD and
             PAG is to develop greater accountability and fight pervasive corruption. Increasing
             citizen participation in PIM and service delivery is a proven avenue for achieving greater
             transparency in Government service delivery. The Public Investment Management and
             Governance Support Project will assist the GoB and civil society to implement Citizen
             Report Cards for priority sectors and create a platform for public dialogue among
             stakeholder groups. The Bank will also explore, with the GoB, the possibility of launching
             a network of BOOST public access portals to help strengthen fiscal transparency and be
             used as public expenditure monitoring tool for citizens, civil society, and the media.

Objective 4: Improving the environment for private sector investment and competitiveness

 Relevant Sustainable Development Goals:
 SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth; full and productive employment
 and decent work for all
 SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
 Relevant IDA18 Special Themes:
 Special Themes 1: Jobs/Economic Transformation; 2: Gender and Development; 5: Governance and
 Institutions

50.      The SCD emphasizes ways in which Benin’s achievement of the twin goals is constrained by
several obstacles to competitiveness: not only bureaucratic and administrative barriers to private
sector investment and competitiveness, but also the high costs imposed by poor and deteriorating
infrastructure. In effect, all the objectives listed under Focus Area 1 of this CPF address different
aspects of competitiveness; these include barriers to value chain formation and private investment in
agriculture, improving the quality of infrastructure, and increasing the public sector’s effectiveness
and accountability. Objective 4 proposes World Bank Group actions more specifically targeting
investment climate improvements and specific GoB programs aiming to promote cross-border
commerce, and tourism in particular. Improved competitiveness will create jobs and improve
economic growth in a number of sectors.

        x    Increasing Benin’s international competitiveness across sectors. In many ways,
             increasing Benin’s competitiveness is a cross-cutting issue. Objective 1 seeks to develop
             its comparative advantage in several agricultural products for export; Objective 2 seeks
             to lower the costs of production overall, including for exports, by investing in critical


                                                   28
             areas of infrastructure; and Objectives 5 and 6 treat the development of human capital
             for employment in a more modern, export-oriented economy. With regard to
             infrastructure, in particular, the World Bank Group is helping the GoB address a range of
             issues that constrain cross-border trade, with a focus on energy and electrification as
             well as on ICT and digitalization of economic infrastructure. The Group will also explore
             possibilities for investment and institutional support to GoB efforts to address the
             myriad bottlenecks in the transport corridor from Cotonou Port to cross-border
             destinations. Furthermore, the Group will pursue with the GoB ways it can further
             support development of a modern export economy through strong investment climate
             reforms, follow-up support to the commercial court system, strengthening of export and
             invest promotion functions, access to markets for export oriented firms, and
             development of entrepreneurial skills. In addition, the Group plans to support
             development of local capital markets in WAEMU through the Joint Capital Markets
             Program (J-CAP) initiative. This program will mobilize the collective expertise of the
             Group to help provide additional domestic financing sources to fill the large gap in key
             sectors such as infrastructure, housing and climate. This engagement will involve
             advisory and analytical work, structuring and delivering key demonstrative financial
             transactions, and knowledge dissemination to attract additional private sector interests.

       x     MFD: Promoting cross-border tourism. The Benin Cross-Border Tourism and
             Competitiveness Project supports the implementation of Benin’s tourism policy for
             2013–2025 which aims to increase tourism by upgrading sites, improve tourism-related
             infrastructure, build skills for higher quality of services, increase promotion and
             marketing, and develop ecotourism. IFC contributes to this project by financing SMEs
             along the tourism value chains through a US$10 million RSF program with Bank of Africa
             Benin, for a maximum target SME portfolio size of up to US$20 million. Benin could also
             benefit from IFC’s Creating Markets Advisory Window which funds knowledge and
             advisory activities that could help create the conditions for private sector investments,
             including diagnostics, project preparation work, capacity building, and upstream
             institutional support. MIGA would also be ready to explore guarantees for any foreign
             investments in the tourism sector.

Foundational themes

       x     Building capacity for governance. The Benin Cross-Border Tourism and Competitiveness
             Project focuses on strengthening the regulatory and institutional environment for
             tourism, while World Bank and IFC assistance will jointly support the strengthening of
             tourism value chains. Meanwhile, the World Bank’s overall support for statistical
             capacity (see Objective 3) will include a focus on the tourism industry.

       x     Women’s economic empowerment. Should a transport corridor operation materialize,
             it would highlight actions designed to enhance the legal status and protections for
             women involved in cross-border commerce.

Focus Area 2: Investing in Human Capital

51.     The PAG considers investing in human capital a top priority for Benin’s development. The PAG
places special emphasis on the need to help create more formalized employment opportunities for
Benin’s burgeoning youth population, to improve health, education, and social protections. The CPF
envisages two objectives to address the PAG’s national priorities.




                                                 29
Objective 5: Improving relevance of education and professional training for strengthened job
creation

 Relevant Sustainable Development Goals:
 SDG 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all
 SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth; full and productive employment; and
 decent work for all
 SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
 Relevant IDA-18 Special Themes: 1: Jobs and Economic Transformation; 2: Gender and Development;
 3: Climate change; 5: Governance and Institutions

52.      The SCD and PAG highlight improving educational outcomes as fundamental to achieving
Benin’s development goals; in particular, in preparing youth for modern and formal sector
employment and with a special focus on reaching the rural poor and women. Disparities in access to
education exist across wealth, gender, and geographical groups. Notably, while girls and boys access
the last grade of primary school at nearly equal rates, gender disparities increase as girls and boys
progress beyond that level. As noted in the CLR, the World Bank Group has long and successful
experience in working with the GoB on basic education issues. By assisting the GoB achieve greater
quality in educational outcomes, with greater equity in access to education, particularly vocational
education, the Group will help it reduce disparities while developing vital human capital for a more
productive and diverse economy.

        x     Improving the quality of basic education. The first step toward preparing Benin’s youth
              for formal sector employment is improvement of basic primary education outcomes. The
              Early Childhood Development Project aims to prepare children better for success at the
              primary education level expanding access to community-supported preschools in the
              poorest districts. Meanwhile, the Benin Global Partnership for Education (GPE) Program,
              managed by the World Bank, has reinforced primary school learning environments
              through teacher training, school rehabilitation/construction, and the development of
              learning assessment systems. The next phase of the GPE program will (i) deepen and
              broaden initiatives to increase learning by adopting school-based approaches and
              extend the scope to include lower secondary education, and (ii) reinforce the
              institutional framework for and governance of the overall education system.

        x     Fostering skills for a more modern economy. The second step under this objective
              involves providing youth with basic competencies to participate in the new economy.
              The proposed Education for Employability Project will help youth acquire the skills
              needed in priority and promising economic sectors with growing demand for skilled
              labor. First, it will improve the instruction of science and technology in secondary
              schools, ensuring that graduates acquire essential skills for priority sectors. Second, the
              project will support the development of postsecondary opportunities in close
              collaboration with economic actors in key sectors to improve the productivity of key
              industries. Institutions that provide one- to two-year programs can prepare graduates
              quickly for insertion in the labor market. The World Bank will also continue to support
              the regional Centers of Excellence program that helps select universities produce
              graduates with high-level skills for key industries. The ongoing Youth Employment
              Project aims to improve access to employment, skills, and opportunities for
              underemployed youth who have not completed formal basic education. It supports
              apprenticeships and youth wishing to start their own business. The World Bank is also
              exploring, with the Government, a Youth at Risk intervention which would focus on social
              integration services to improve inclusion of youth at risk in selected communities.



                                                      30
Foundational themes

        x     Women’s economic empowerment. All the actions included under this objective will
              provide specific support to girls and women for the purposes of economic
              empowerment. First, each project will track and ensure equal opportunity for girls to
              access relevant services (for example, school completion, enrollment in secondary
              education, and in science and technology courses, access to training opportunities linked
              to priority economic sectors). Girls who have already dropped out and who are unlikely
              to return to school will be targeted by the World Bank Sahel Women’s Empowerment
              and Demographics (SWEDD) Project, which Benin will join. Beyond this, the Youth
              Employment Project is successfully targeting young women, who constitute more than
              half of the project’s beneficiaries. To further improve young women’s welfare and
              economic prospects, project benefits include a life-skills training centered around social
              norms and self-esteem, and child care to ensure full participation of young mothers in
              training. In addition, the World Bank’s Gender Innovation Lab will conduct an impact
              evaluation to assess the gender differential and overall impact of information
              campaigns, sensitization activities, and short-term technical retraining in productive
              trades. The World Bank Group’s policy dialogue around potential future operations with
              the GoB will also feature: (a) the links between early marriage and dropout rates among
              girls particularly in rural areas and (b) the role of social norms and intrahousehold
              bargaining in unlocking a young women’s economic empowerment potential.
Objective 6: Improving social protection systems

 Relevant Sustainable Development Goals:
 SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security, and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture
 SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages
 SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
 Relevant IDA18 Special Themes:
 Special Themes 2: Gender and Development; 5: Governance and Institutions

53.      The SCD and PAG emphasize the need to improve the coverage and administration of social
protection for the poor. A high priority for the GoB is extension of pension and health insurance
coverage, now largely limited to formal sector employees, to several categories of informal sector
workers and in doing so decrease the risk to the elderly and the working poor that an unforeseen
economic shock or health emergency will throw them deeper into poverty. Meanwhile, improving
outcomes in health, especially for women and children, are essential in promoting more inclusive
growth and breaking the intergenerational cycle of poverty. Child nutrition is a particularly high
priority for Benin to avoid physical stunting and other medical problems among the youth who will
form the workforce for a modernizing future economy. Another key element of health in Benin is to
protect against the epidemic diseases that loom as a perennial risk to the entire region; in particular,
weak disease surveillance systems increase the risk of major health epidemic outbreaks. Finally, focus
on young children (Early Years Initiative) will impact Benin’s development over the longer term.

        x     Improved administration of pensions and health insurance. Ongoing World Bank Group
              TA to the Government’s flagship Health Insurance Program (Assurance pour le
              Renforcement du Capital Humain [ARCH]) is expected to assist the GoB to establish the
              regulatory and institutional basis for a viable pension system, to include a retirement
              savings scheme for informal sector workers, and a clear role for private sector financial
              institutions. ARCH also encompasses a health insurance system to support the GoB’s
              plans for universal access. Meanwhile, proposed ASA under the Rapid Social Response
              Multi-Donor Trust Fund would study the financial sustainability of the pension system.


                                                      31
        x    Improved child nutrition and family services. The new Early Years Nutrition and Child
             Development Project (FY19) will build on the successes of the Multisectoral Food Health
             Nutrition Project (PMASN; 2014–2019) to increase the coverage and utilization of
             community-based child development and nutrition interventions, support the
             development of an integrated approach to coordinate the multitude of stakeholders
             involved in Early Years’ nutrition and child development interventions, and build
             leadership to collaboratively communicate and implement a holistic package of family
             services. The project will also prepare children better for success at primary level by
             expanding access to community-supported preschools in the poorest districts.

        x    Improved disease surveillance. The CPF will include Benin’s integration into the Regional
             Disease Surveillance Systems Enhancement Phase III Project (REDISSE III), which will
             support the Ministry of Health’s efforts to strengthen health systems for better
             preparedness and response to epidemic diseases.

        x    Citizen participation. The safety net program to be scaled up under Appui aux
             Communes et Communautés pour l’Expansion des Services Sociaux (ACCESS) will
             continue to leverage the CDD approach in the identification of the poorest and most
             vulnerable households and the implementation of labor-intensive public works.

Foundational themes

        x    Building capacity for governance. To ensure transparency and participation, the ACCESS
             program will be implemented through a community-driven approach, implemented at
             commune level. The operation will also build the capacity of poor households receiving
             social assistance to improve their livelihoods with the eventual goal of ‘graduating’ from
             social assistance. In addition, ACCESS will support the ongoing development of a national
             social protection platform that will serve multiple programs, including ARCH. Meanwhile,
             the Early Years Nutrition and Child Development Project will build capacity at national
             and local government levels to plan, implement, and monitor child nutrition programs.

        x    Women’s economic empowerment. The Early Years Nutrition and Child Development
             Project will have an explicit focus on women, aiming to accelerate behavioral change and
             improvement of child feeding and stimulation practices. The Sahel Women’s
             Empowerment and Demographics (SWEDD) Project will address women’s sexual and
             reproductive health through investment in four priority areas designed to accelerate the
             demographic transition: reproductive health (including family planning), child health and
             nutrition, girls’ education, and age of marriage.

Focus Area 3: Increasing Resilience and Reducing Climate-Related Vulnerability

54.      Benin is vulnerable in several respects. It is a small country with a high proportion of its
population living in poverty and marginal conditions whose well-being is vulnerable to climate change
and rapidly changing market conditions. Increasing their resilience begins with helping the
communities develop the capability to understand and incorporate disaster and climate-related risks
considerations in the management of development planning, implementation and monitoring of
public investments. At the national level, it means assisting the GoB in strengthening the institutional
framework to improve management of the potential negative impacts of disasters and climate-related
shocks by increasing capacity to rapidly respond and effectively reduce existing risks.




                                                  32
Objective 7: Building resilience at the community level

 Relevant Sustainable Development Goals:
 SDG 11: Sustainable cities and communities
 SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages
 SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
 Relevant IDA18 Special Themes:
 Special Themes 2: Gender and Development; 5: Governance and Institutions

55.     Building resilience among Benin’s poorest communities, both in cities and in small rural
communes, will require strengthening and improving the coverage and targeting of social safety nets
to reduce the risk of households falling into poverty as a result of economic, social, and natural disaster
shocks and to enable households to improve their welfare. Lacking adequate social protection and
with limited savings and insurance, the poor are more exposed to shocks (bad weather; plummeting
commodity prices; increases in consumer prices, accidents, disease, and so on) that can propel poor
households deeper into poverty. As the CLR notes, the World Bank Group has had successful
experience in community-based projects in Benin. The essential elements of the World Bank Group’s
approach to increased resilience for communities will include:

        x     Increased resilience for the poor in rural communes. A social safety net program under
              the new ACCESS project will be composed of (a) a basic CCT to all targeted households
              and (b) labor-intensive public works for the same households to provide the opportunity
              to earn an additional transfer during the agricultural lean season. ACCESS will continue
              to mobilize a CDD approach in the identification of the poorest and most vulnerable
              households and the implementation of labor-intensive public works.

        x     Increased resilience for the poor in urban areas. The Cities Support Project will continue
              to support municipalities to improve their performance and service delivery. Going
              forward, the World Bank Group will explore opportunities for accelerating performance
              and service delivery improvements and at the municipal level. The Small Town Water
              Supply and Urban Septage Management Project will support municipalities in the
              development of capacity to deliver water and sanitation services to their populations.

        x     Citizen participation. The safety net program to be scaled up under ACCESS will continue
              to leverage the CDD approach in the identification of the poorest and most vulnerable
              households and the implementation of labor-intensive public works. To ensure citizen
              engagement, communities will receive Grassroots Management Training and undergo
              Participatory Poverty Assessments to enable them to identify the factors underlying
              poverty in their community, pre-identify the poorest and most vulnerable households in
              their community, and prioritize their needs.

Foundational themes

        x     Building capacity for governance at the commune level. As noted earlier (Objective 3),
              the World Bank Group will work with the GoB at the central level to improve its
              administration of decentralized delivery of public services. The ACCESS project will
              reinforce the capacity of communes to implement participatory Commune Development
              Plans, and increase citizen engagement and community implementation of small
              demand-driven infrastructure projects.




                                                      33
        x    Women’s economic empowerment at the community level. Women will be a priority
             target group for the training and support for income-generating activities provided
             through the safety net program. The World Bank Group will explore opportunities to use
             the ACCESS CCT instruments to incentivize SME formality and reduce start-up risk for
             women entrepreneurs.

Objective 8: Reducing vulnerability to climate-related threats

 Relevant Sustainable Development Goals:
 SDG 13: Combat climate change
 SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
 Relevant IDA18 Special Themes:
 Special Themes 2: Gender and Development; 3: Climate Change; 5: Governance and Institutions

56.      The SCD maintains that the effects of climate change constitute a serious barrier to the
sustainability of advances in other priority areas for achieving the twin goals. Building Benin’s
resilience in the face of climate change will require addressing issues across a range of sectors,
including agricultural production technology, coastal erosion, forest management/preservation and
water management, to name a few. A number of World Bank Group investment operations aim to
produce climate co-benefits within a variety of sectors, and these have been noted earlier. Objective
8 is particularly focused on the priority challenges of managing the impact of climate change in coastal
zones as well as flooding in urban areas. In Benin, large numbers of the poor are located in coastal and
urban areas, and the damage to productive land and infrastructure caused by erosion and flooding
affects the poor most severely. Countering the effects of climate change, particularly in coastal zones,
is both a national- and regional-level development challenge requiring coordination and multisector
interventions across national borders. Yet another major challenge in Benin is to reverse large-scale
deforestation, a major cause of which is overcutting for fuel consumption. As the CLR notes, the World
Bank Group has successfully engaged with Benin in its efforts to fight the impacts of climate change
(this was a cross-cutting theme under the previous CPS) and is well positioned to apply its skills,
knowledge, and growing array of instruments (including regional initiatives) to the effort, as follows:

        x    Improved management of coastal areas. Protecting the coastal zone from erosion and
             restoring fragile coastal ecosystems are major objectives of Benin’s Nationally
             Determined Contribution Document. The World Bank Group is supporting these
             objectives through its regional initiative (in collaboration with Global Environment
             Facility [GEF] and the Nordic Development Fund) the West Africa Coastal Area (WACA)
             Resilience Investment Program.

        x    Improved management of forest resources. With deforestation exacerbating the impact
             of climate change, the Energy Service Improvement Project will implement community-
             based forest management plans covering 300,000 ha in several municipalities, including
             financing tree nurseries, tree plantings, logistical support, training of key actors on forest
             resource management and energy-efficient charcoal production, communication
             campaigns targeting local governments and households, and acquisition of equipment
             for income-generation activities such as beekeeping.

        x    Introducing new financial instruments to counter climate risk. The World Bank Group
             is in discussion with the GoB about the possibility of engaging in a Catastrophe Deferred
             Drawdown Option (CAT-DDO) operation.




                                                   34
Foundational themes

        x     Building capacity for governance. The WACA Program will support Benin’s development
              of a policy framework and instruments for the operationalization of its coastal
              management plans. It will improve the monitoring of coastal resources, development of
              preparedness, and response and management strategies associated with coastal
              inundation.

        x     Women’s economic empowerment. As women tend to be among the poorest in any
              given sector, climate change has a disproportionately adverse effect on them. Both the
              WACA and the Energy Service Improvement Project will support alternative income-
              generating activities with a focus on women, as well as ensuring their involvement in
              stakeholder groups. The WACA will also foster women’s participation in local climate
              leadership through decentralized planning mechanisms.

Implementing the CPF

Financial Envelope and IDA 18 and IDA 19 (partial) Allocation

57.      The CPF (FY19–FY23) will span the periods of IDA 18 (FY19–FY20) and of IDA 19 (FY21–FY23).
The World Bank Group will apply a combination of lending, advisory and analytical work, and
convening power to achieve the CPF objectives. The indicative IDA 18 allocation for Benin is US$482
million, not including additional resources which Benin could potentially access through the IDA 18
Special Windows. These include the Regional Window aimed at bolstering regional integration efforts;
the PSW mobilizing private capital, de-risking investments, and promoting private sector-based
growth; the Scale-Up Facility providing non-concessional borrowing for high-impact projects; if
necessary, the CRW aimed at providing support in the event of severe natural disasters, health
emergencies, and economic crises; and finally the CAT-DDO facility, which is currently under
exploration with the authorities. In addition, the World Bank Group will leverage all World
Bank/IFC/MIGA instruments and seek to crowd in other financiers, including the private sector, and
development partners to maximize the effectiveness of development results. In outer years, actual
allocations will depend on (a) the total IDA resources available; (b) the country’s performance rating,
per capita GNI, and population; (c) the terms of IDA assistance (grants/credits); (d) the allocation
deductions associated with Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative annual debt service foregone as
applicable; (e) the performance, other allocation parameters, and IDA assistance terms for other IDA
borrowers; and (f) the number of IDA-eligible countries. Table 6 is a CPF financing table, which maps
proposed World Bank interventions through to the PLR stage.

58.       IFC and MIGA operations. IFC is seeking to increase its engagement in Benin through
investments and advisory services primarily aligned with the Government’s priorities. While MIGA will
seek to mobilize private sector foreign investment in the country, it has no predetermined envelope
for guarantees over the CPF period, beyond its existing guarantee in the services sector. However,
MIGA is seeking opportunities in the infrastructure and financial service sector through its political risk
insurance products—namely, transfer and convertibility, expropriation, war and civil disturbance, and
breach of contract, the latter in the context of PPP concessions. On a last resort basis, the IDA 18 PSW
facilities could be deployed to develop transformational solutions not otherwise possible, especially
in power and access to finance.




                                                    35
                                            Table 6. CPF Financing

                                                        World Bank Support                           Total
                                                                                                    Amount
                                                     National IDA
     Areas of Engagement                                                                          (Indicative
                                        FY19               FY20                             SUF     in US$,
                                                                       FY21   FY22   FY23          millions)
                                  Grant     Credit   Grant    Credit
 Focus Area 1: Structural Transformation for Competitiveness and Productivity
 1 DPO                                      30               30     70       70      70              480
     *Operation on Agricultural
 2   Competitiveness and                                                                    160
     Diversification (FY20)
     Water Sector Reform and                          50
 3   Universal Access Program
     (PforR) Phase 2
 Subtotal                          0           30     50          30    70     70    70     160
 Focus Area 2: Investing in Human Capital
 1 SWEDD                           20                                  40     40     40              210
    Early Years Nutrition and
 2                                 30
    Child Development Project
 3 *Youth at Risk                                     40
    Education for
 4
    Employability
    *Dismantling Barriers to
 5 Women Economic
    Empowerment (WE-FI)
 Subtotal                          50          0      40          0     40     40    40      0
 Focus Area 3: Increasing Resilience and Reducing Climate-Related Vulnerability
    Combatting Forestry and         20                               50      50      50                    220
 1
    Desertification
    Greater Cotonou Urban                   50
 2
    Drainage and Sanitation
 Subtotal                           20      50        0       0      50      50      50      0
     *Tentative



59.      Knowledge, Convening Services, and Trust Funds (TFs). World Bank Group activities will
adopt an integrated approach to tailoring the packaging of financing with knowledge and convening
services (ASA and TA). The World Bank Group will leverage its comparative advantage by bringing to
bear its global expertise and convening power in response to GoB’s development priorities. ASA and
TA products currently planned for the CPF period are summarized in Table 7.




                                                      36
                         Table 7. World Bank Group Knowledge Services and TFs FY19–FY23
                                 Current ASA and TF                       Tentative ASA and TF
 Focus Area 1:                Financial Sector             Assistance to Water and Sanitation Sector Reforms
 Structural                   Assessment                   in Benin
 Transformation for           Benin-Competitive Value      Energy Sector Review
 Competitiveness and          Chains in Agriculture
 Productivity                 Benin Statistical Capacity   Streamlining Strategies and Capacity of Institutions
                              Building                     for the SDGs in Rural and Small Town Water
                                                           Tax Policy Study
                                                           Support to Poverty Analysis and Monitoring and
                                                           Evaluation
                                                           Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
                                                           (ESMAP), Global Infrastructure Facility (GIF),
                                                           Korean Green Growth (KGG) TF for the energy
                                                           sector to (a) develop the transmission and
                                                           distribution (T&D) systems and energy efficiency and
                                                           (b) strengthen client capacity to design, plan, and
                                                           implement green growth initiatives, strategies, and
                                                           investments
                                                           Global Procurement Partnership TF (GPRCPT)
                                                           Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest to Support
                                                           the Microfinance Sector Supervisory Agency (CGAP)
                                                           Supreme Audit Institution Capacity Development
                                                           Fund (SAIF)
                                                           Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
                                                           (PEFA)
 Focus Area 2:                Technical Support to         Early Learning Partnership (ELP)
 Investing in Human           ARCH
 Capital                                                   White Paper on Gender
                              Gender and Youth             Policy Reform on Teacher Employability and
                              Employment in Benin          Standards
                              GPE                          Scaling up Nutrition (SUN)
                                                           GPE
 Focus Area 3:                Impact Evaluation of         Scaling Up Social Protection in Benin
 Increasing Resilience        Health Result-Based
 and Reducing                 Financing
 Climate-Related              Forestry and Biodiversity    Global Water Security and Sanitation Partnership TF
 Vulnerability                Assessment                   Support for Water and Sanitation Sector Reforms
                                                           (GWSP)
                              Education Sector Review      TF to Address Climate-Related Threats and
                                                           Vulnerabilities (GEF)
                                                           Global Financing Facility in Support of Women and
                                                           Children (GFF)
Note: Blue: TFs; Italic: Tentative.

Procurement and FM Arrangements

60.      Benin’s public procurement system suffers from several weaknesses, particularly in
implementation. The main deficiencies are related to (a) inconsistencies in procurement legislation,
particularly as application of the law does not extend to defense and national security procurement,
as well as requests for quotations; (b) the high proportion of sole source contracts, which, according
to the National Procurement Control Directorate, total around 30 percent of all procurement actions;
(c) the length of procurement procedures, which range from three to six months, chiefly as a result of
inadequate technical capacity, a lack of physical and information technology (IT) resources, and the



                                                           37
fact that control bodies focus more on process than on service delivery, which is to ensure the
availability of procurement contracts on a timely and competitive basis.

Donor and Partnership Arrangements

61.     The World Bank Group will pursue common approaches with other donors, including
emerging partners and private sector investors, to increase aid effectiveness and reduce
fragmentation of interventions. Twelve sector groups, with each one led by an aid agency, ensure
coordination across the following areas: Agriculture (European Union-UE), Decentralization
(Germany), Water and Sanitation (Netherlands), Education (Switzerland), Energy (Millennium
Challenge Corporation/Account), Environment (United Nations Development Program [UNDP]),
Gender (USAID), Macro/Public Finance (EU), Justice (France), Civil Service Reform (UNDP), Health
(Belgium), and Private Sector (World Bank Group). An analysis of donor engagement, currently under
way for the Heads of Diplomatic and Aid Mission in Benin, will further highlight the status of donor
support to PAG implementation and serve to better define the comparative advantages, cooperation,
and co-financing potential for the World Bank Group in engagement with other agencies.

IV.     MANAGING RISKS TO THE CPF PROGRAM

                           Table 8. Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT)
                                Risk Categories                               Rating (H, S, M, L)
 Political and governance                                                             S
 Macroeconomic                                                                        S
 Sector strategies and policies                                                       M
 Technical design of project or program                                               M
 Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability                         M
 Fiduciary                                                                            M
 Environment and social                                                               M
 Stakeholders                                                                         L
 Overall                                                                          Moderate
Note: H = High, S= Substantial, M = Moderate, L = Low.

Political and Governance Risks

62.     Political and governance risks (Substantial). Unpredictable political and governance
developments create some uncertainty in Benin at this time, particularly in the context of an
administration whose track record is not yet fully established. As noted earlier (paragraph 7), in April
2017, the Parliament rejected President Talon’s introduction of an independent Auditor General’s
Office, a new method of appointing members to the Constitutional Court, the simplification of
procedures in the High Court of Justice, and a revamping of political party funding. In addition, the
concentration of wealth and power in the hands of a relatively small number of people, cases of
corruption, noncompliance, and impunity also create an environment that could prompt unrest and
disruption of development plans. Through the CPF, the World Bank Group will ensure that (a) the
financial, knowledge, and convening services provided are amply communicated to citizens up front;
(b) projects are seen to strengthen voice and accountability and deliver tangible results to
beneficiaries; and (c) adequate channels are provided to enable beneficiaries to provide feedback,
especially where corrective action is needed in areas of transparency or service delivery. Should there
be a substantial change in the politico-governance environment in the field, the World Bank Group
would reevaluate its approach, while maintaining its focus on twin goal achievement.

63.     Macroeconomic sustainability risks (Substantial). Such risks to the CPF will require vigilance.
The fiscal and debt situation deteriorated in 2015–2016 as poor fiscal management, limited



                                                      38
accountability, and unorthodox PFM led to an increase in the fiscal deficit (including grants), which
grew to 8.0 percent in 2015. Total public debt jumped to 49.5 percent of GDP at end-2016. The new
administration contained the 2016 overall budget deficit to 6.2 percent, while the projected 2017
budget deficit rose to 7.9 percent, reflecting Government’s ambitious public investment program.
Associated risks include revenue projections due to Nigeria’s economic slowdown, the potential for
tightening regional liquidity markets and associated debt rollover concerns, and contingent liabilities
linked to SOEs. The ECF program with the IMF provides comfort that macro risks will be contained and
the World Bank Group will coordinate their approach with its sister institution. Under the CPF,
measures taken under budget support operations will help mitigate these risks. The World Bank Group
will continue to support with capacity building in macroeconomic, budget, and debt management.
DPOs will target domestic revenue reforms designed to reduce Government reliance on revenues
generated from imports informally reexported to Nigeria. The strategy will also support business
climate improvements, value addition, and job creation in the domestic market. If the macroeconomic
situation deteriorates, World Bank Group support would be adjusted.

64.     Institutional capacity risks (Moderate). The Government has made a commitment to
reforming Benin’s public administration and to establishing a meritocratic system based upon
competence and transparency. While the needed reforms are designed and pushed through, the
Government has created a series of agencies staffed by highly competent teams, some from the
Beninese diaspora, which have been recruited to accelerate PAG implementation. To mitigate risks to
the technical design, implementation, and sustainability of proposed CPF interventions, the World
Bank Group will prioritize capacity building with the core civil service, academic institutions, research
bodies, and think tanks, while collaborating with the specialized agencies.

65.      Fiduciary risk (Moderate). Despite remaining risks, the Government has put in place strong
countermeasures, in particular a new public procurement code (October 2017) that provides for the
professionalization of the public procurement system along with a number of other measures
designed to address systemic risks. The World Bank Group will continue to closely monitor the quality
of fiduciary management and make adjustments in approach should the need arise.

66.      Environment and social risks (Moderate). Benin’s coastal population, especially the poor, is
vulnerable to the effects of climate change, whose already precarious livelihoods depend on the
quality and quantity of natural resources. The coastline is also susceptible to increased flooding caused
by storm surges and intense rainstorms. Degradation of coastal resources and ecosystems is
accelerating due to increasing population pressure on the coast, demand for resources, and anarchic
coastal development. The CPF plans to assist Benin address these issues through the Regional West
Africa Coastal Resilience Program (WACA). Should an unanticipated natural disaster affect CPF
implementation plans under the WACA, the Government and the World Bank Group are exploring an
IDA CAT-DDO instrument for both the Government and World Bank Group to hedge against such an
eventuality. The World Bank Group could also restructure operations as needed should these risks
become reality.

67.     Sub-regional security threats. While the situation in the field in Benin is calm, and direct
threats to the country are estimated to remain low, a rise in jihadist-related terrorism in the sub-
region places the country at some risk of instability. The World Bank Group will continue to monitor
the situation closely in collaboration with World Bank Group Corporate Security and United Nations
Department for Safety and Security, taking measures needed to protect World Bank Group staff and
address any threat of derailment of CPF interventions in the country.




                                                   39
                                                                       Annex 1: CPF Results Matrix

Focus Area 1: Structural Transformation for Competitiveness and Productivity
Intervention Logic: This focus area mirrors one of the key pillars of the Government’s program for economic revival. Its strategy as laid forth in the PAG includes a focus
on efficiency and accountability in the management of public finances, improved administration of public investments and PPPs, and improved competitiveness in regional
markets. The PAG also emphasizes the need to enhance agricultural productivity, improve infrastructure and connectivity, and overcome human capital constraints to
increase competitiveness, productivity, and job creation.
The four objectives encompassed within this focus area aim to help Benin achieve the structural transformation of its economy that is a top priority for action both in
the SCD and the PAG, and the key pathway to poverty reduction. Both documents emphasize the need to enhance agricultural productivity, improve the quality of
infrastructure, increase the efficiency and accountability of public sector management, and make Benin more competitive in international markets. The World Bank
program under Focus Area 1 of this CPF addresses different aspects of competitiveness and productivity as drivers of structural transformation; these include barriers to
value-chain formation and private investment in agriculture, improving the quality of infrastructure, and increasing the effectiveness and accountability of the public
sector and supporting an enabling environment for private sector and investments. It does so leveraging synergies both across the World Bank Group as well as its
comparative advantage in working collaboratively with other development partners.
Objective 1: Fostering agricultural productivity
SDG 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere
SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture
SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth; full and productive employment; and decent work for all.
SDG 13: Combat climate change
IDA 18 Special Theme 1: Jobs and Economic Transformation
IDA 18 Special Theme 2: Gender and Development
IDA 18 Special Theme 5: Governance and Institutions
Intervention Logic: Both the SCD and PAG prioritize the need to realize Benin’s considerable agricultural potential as the path of least resistance toward overall economic
growth, production of stable employment, and reduction of poverty. Increasing agricultural productivity has a direct and important welfare effect on households beyond
fostering growth and employment opportunities. Prominent gender imbalances in the agriculture sector present opportunities for proactive interventions to foster
women’s economic empowerment. Building on the World Bank Group’s long and successful track record of operations in Benin’s agricultural sector and through PADA,
the World Bank is supporting smallholders, producers, agricultural cooperatives, and the private sector with integrated services for production and market infrastructure.
Both PADA and WAAPP will promote agricultural innovation and improved agricultural technologies. Innovation and connectivity to markets will also be galvanized by the
Digital Services for Sustainable Development Project that will provide digital solutions to smallholders that will increase select crop yields and sales and reduce postharvest
loss. By leveraging the range of the World Bank Group expertise and MFD, the Program will provide access to finance for agribusiness and value chain development through
PADA and IFC support. The Fiscal Reform and Growth Development Policy Credit series will develop the institutional and regulatory framework for improving agricultural
productivity, complemented by PADA’s strengthening of the capacity of civil society and producers’ organizations for better citizen engagement and increased participation
in the policy dialogue. Ensuring that women benefit from improvements in agricultural competitiveness is emphasized in the proposed CPF program, through PADA support
to women in targeted value chains and the digital solutions support to women-owned enterprises in the development of ICT services for rural communities. Advisory
services will be used selectively to underpin the program, including for a diagnostic of agribusiness entrepreneurship. The World Bank Group will ensure synergies across



                                                                                      40
    the CPF pillars to develop human capital and technical skills for agriculture and maximize climate co-benefits by reduction of the climate risk to agriculture; use of early
    warning systems; climate-smart agricultural techniques and production systems; and positive socioeconomic impacts. The combined package of support is expected to
    increase production of processed products and production of high-value-added products for the domestic, regional, and international markets.
    CPF Objective Indicators                                           Supplementary Progress Indicators               World Bank Group Program
    Average quantity (kg) of processed cashew (C), pineapple            Micro projects funded through matching               Ongoing
    juice (P), and milled rice (R) for each ton produced                grants (number)                                      x Agricultural Productivity and Diversification (PADA)
    C - Baseline (2016): 55, Target (2023): 61                          Baseline (2017): 0                                     (P115886, P160029)
    P - Baseline (2016): 270, Target (2023): 300                        Target (2022): 180                                   x West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program
    R - Baseline (2016): 220, Target (2023): 240                        (Source: PADA)                                         (WAAPP) (P122065)
    (Source: PADA P160029/P160700)                                                                                           x First Fiscal Reform and Growth Development Policy
                                                                        Drying areas built in support of rice value            Credit (phase 1) (P160700)
    Increase in volume of sales of selected crops (rice and             chain (number)
    maize) 5 (%)                                                        Baseline (2017): 0                                   Pipeline
    Baseline (2018):                                                    Target (2022): 100                                   x Digital Services for Sustainable Development
    Maize: 50,000 tons                                                  (Source: PADA)                                          Project (FY18, P162599)
    Rice: 25,000 tons                                                                                                        x Benin Second Fiscal Reform and Growth DPF
    Target (2023): 20% over baseline for each crop                      Female farmers and producers supported                  (P166115)
    (Source: P162599)                                                   Baseline (2017): 0
                                                                                                                             x Operation on Agricultural Competitiveness and
                                                                        Target (2023): 86,000
                                                                                                                                Diversification (non-IDA SUF)
                                                                        (Source: PADA)
                                                                                                                             ASA
                                                                        Volume of private investment in targeted
                                                                                                                             x Competitive value chains in agriculture (P166247)
                                                                        value chains (pineapple, cashew, and shea
                                                                        butter):
                                                                                                                             IFC/MIGA
                                                                        Baseline (2018): 0
                                                                                                                             x IFC study of agricultural value chains
                                                                        Target (2022): US$5 million
                                                                        (Source: SUF)

                                                                        Share of cashew (C) and pineapple (P)
                                                                        samples tested by the Laboratoire Central de
                                                                        Contrôle de la Sécurité Sanitaire des
                                                                        Aliments (LCSSA) which meet international
                                                                        standards:

5Indicator measures change in volume of wholesales of crops, with baseline based on data on patterns of production and marketed surplus of these two crops and the potential beneficiaries
of World Bank Group interventions.


                                                                                            41
                                                                   C - Baseline (2017): 90 percent, Target (2022):
                                                                   98 percent.
                                                                   P - Baseline (2017): 85 percent, Target (2022):
                                                                   96 percent.
                                                                   (Source: PADA)
Objective 2: Improving the quality of infrastructure
SDG 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization, and foster innovation
SDG 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern energy for all
SDG 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all
SDG 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable
SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment, and decent work for all.
SDG 13: Combat climate change
IDA 18 Special Theme 1: Jobs and Economic Transformation
IDA 18 Special Theme 2: Gender and Development
Intervention Logic: The SCD and PAG both emphasize the importance of investing in infrastructure, whose poor condition currently is a major impediment to achieving
the twin goals. Where electricity is concerned, a poorly functioning electrical utility has created power shortages that hinder light manufacturing and provide limited access
especially to Benin’s poorest and rural populations. Lack of adequate water and sanitation services infrastructure leaves only about half of Benin’s population with clean
drinking water, produces serious drainage and flooding problems, and creates serious health issues. Inadequate road transport infrastructure increases the costs of doing
business and is a serious impediment to commerce and economic growth overall. Expanding access to basic digital services can provide a large number of economic
benefits to Benin’s population. As discussed in the CLR, the World Bank Group has considerable experience in several areas of infrastructure within Benin. In addition, the
World Bank has recently launched regional initiatives (for example, in energy and transport) that allow it to develop operations within Benin that benefit from the
efficiencies and economic benefits.
The Energy Service Improvement Project will improve the electrical utility’s (SBEE) performance by contributing to reduced commercial and technical losses, while the
North Core/Dorsale Nord Regional Transmission Project aims to facilitate energy trade and increase the access to electricity in the northern part of Benin. The Fiscal Reform
and Growth Development Policy Credit series underpins investments and capacity in the energy and water sectors. The World Bank will continue its strong engagement
in water and sanitation. The CPF will scale up support through the Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program targeting large-scale investments in piped rural
water systems, and the Greater Cotonou Urban Drainage and Sanitation project will support the GoB’s efforts to improve drainage, urban planning, and
sanitation/environmental management. The Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development Project will build digital infrastructure and harness the potential of e-services
in achieving greater efficiency in public service delivery and management for rural population and businesses. The Maximizing Financing for Development -MDF- approach
is fully harnessed for this objective; partnering with potential investors, PPPs and RSFs will be a core element in the infrastructure initiatives. IFC provides guarantees to
the water sector and generator suppliers and plans to explore long-term options to further contribute to electricity generation. Climate co-benefits will be maximized
through the energy and water portfolio, and activities are built in to ensure that women fully access services.




                                                                                     42
    CPF Objective Indicators                                            Supplementary Progress Indicators                    World Bank Group Program

    People provided with new or improved electricity service            SBEE Management improvement plan                     Ongoing
    (Number 6)                                                          Baseline (2017): None                                x Energy Service Improvement Project (P161015)
    Baseline (2018): 0                                                  About 75% of MIP key measures                        x Public Investment Management and Governance
    Target (2023): 125,000                                              implemented                                            Support Project (P147014)
    (Source: 161015)                                                    Target (2022): Plan implemented                      x Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage
                                                                        (Source: P161015)                                      Management Project (P156738)
    People provided with access to improved water sources
    (Number 7)                                                          Female-headed households provided with               Pipeline
    Baseline (2017): 0                                                  new or improved electricity connection               x Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development
    Target (2023): 1,864,000                                            (Percentage)                                            (FY18, P162599)
    (Source: including 1,660,000 from P164186 and 204,000 from          Baseline: 0                                          x Fiscal Reform and Growth Development Policy
    P156738)                                                            Target (2022): 10% (of 15,000)                          Credit (phase 2)
                                                                        (Source: P161015)                                    x Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access P4R
    Beneficiaries accessing mobile communication services                                                                       Program (FY20, P164186)
    (voice and SMS) in targeted zones (percentage) 8                    Contracts with regional water operators              x Greater Cotonou Urban Drainage and Sanitation
    Baseline (2018): 60% (for women 52%)                                launched                                                Project (FY19)
    Target (2023): 70% (for women 70%)                                  Baseline (2018): 0
                                                                                                                             x North Core/Dorsale Nord Regional Interconnector
    (Source: P162599)                                                   Target (2023): 100%
                                                                                                                                Project (FY18, P162933)
                                                                        (Source: P164186)
                                                                                                                             ASA
                                                                        Ratio of female beneficiaries accessing the
                                                                                                                             x Assistance to water and sanitation sector reforms
                                                                        Internet (%)
                                                                                                                                in Benin (P166502)
                                                                        Baseline (2018): 7%
                                                                        Target (2023): 15%                                   x Streamlining Strategies and Capacity of Institutions
                                                                        (Source: P162599)                                       for the SDGs in Rural and Small Town Water TA
                                                                                                                                grant (P157374)
                                                                                                                             x Energy Sector Review (P161919)
                                                                                                                             x ESMAP/GIF/KGG TF for the energy sector to (a)
                                                                                                                                develop the T&D systems and energy efficiency


6 Following Corporate Results Indicator (CRI) definition; from the World Bank Guidance on Corporate Results Indicators. Catalogue Number OPS5.06-GUID.132. Target represents around 5
percent increase in the number of current households (485,000) in Benin connected to SBEE electricity and a higher share of targeted areas of peri-urban areas of Cotonou, Porto-Novo,
Parakou, and Natitingou.
7 Following CRI definition; from the World Bank Guidance on Corporate Results Indicators. Catalogue Number OPS5.06-GUID.132.
8 The targeted zones are Poles de Developpement Agricoles 1, 2, 3, and 4 equivalent to the following five administrative regions: Atacora, Donga, Borgou, Alibori, and Collines.




                                                                                           43
                                                                                                                       and (b) strengthen client capacity to design, plan,
                                                                                                                       and implement green growth initiatives, strategies,
                                                                                                                       and investments (tentative)

                                                                                                                   IFC/MIGA
                                                                                                                   x IFC guarantee to emergency power suppliers
                                                                                                                   x IFC: Benin Water Scale-Up (602063)
                                                                                                                   x Potential MIGA guarantees for foreign investors
                                                                                                                      into the energy sector
Objective 3: Improving governance in management of public finances
SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth; full and productive employment; and decent work for all.
IDA 18 Special Theme 5: Governance and Institutions
IDA 18 Special Theme 2: Gender and Development
Intervention Logic: The SCD and PAG both consider addressing governance issues to be a top priority. Governance weaknesses are perhaps the leading constraint to
growth and are important to inclusion in terms of equity in the delivery of Government services and in ensuring equality in economic opportunity. They constitute obstacles
to achieving the twin goals within virtually all aspects of economic and social development; hence, they are treated as a foundational, cross-cutting issue requiring World
Bank Group action targeting sector-specific issues under each objective of this CPF. The present objective focuses on an overarching dimension of the problematic
governance in Benin: the need for greater effectiveness and accountability in public sector, and particularly public finance, management. As the CLR notes, the World Bank
has extensive experience working with the GoB on these issues. Greater effectiveness and accountability in public sector management will allow the GoB to mobilize and
apply resources with much improved impact and results in all areas of development, particularly those aimed for in the PAG.

The Fiscal Reform and Growth Development Policy Credit series will continue to support the GoB’s fiscal management to broaden the fiscal space needed to finance its
ambitious program. The PIM and Governance Support Project is providing TA to improve the Government’s capacity to manage PIM and address cross-cutting deficiencies
in planning, budgeting, tax, procurement, and M&E to improve capital budget execution. In parallel, targeted analytical work is planned on the revenue, expenditure, and
debt management side, and technical assistance may also be provided with IMF to assess contingent liabilities linked to PPP projects. The CPF analytical work will also
address Benin’s fiduciary systems and capacity (procurement and accounting systems, efficiency in processing and workflow processes, and the quality of decentralization
to enhance the predictability of resource flows to communes for improved local governance (Objective 7).
CPF Objective Indicators                                         Supplementary Progress Indicators                World Bank Group Program

Share of non-customs taxes paid through the banking system        PPP transactions (number)                        Ongoing
and the e-payment system (percentage)                             Baseline (2014): 0                               x Public Investment Management and Governance
                                                                  Target (2020): 5                                   Support Project (P147014)
Baseline (2016): 0 percent                                        (Source: P147014)                                x First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (phase 1)
Target (2023): 85 percent
                                                                                                                     (P160700)
(Source: P160700; Government, Ministry of Economy and
Finance [Direction Générale des Impôts-DGI])


                                                                                    44
                                                                  Reduction of variance between the P               x MIGA guarantee for Société d’Exploitation du
Investment budget execution rate (percentage)                     Programme d'Investissement Public (PIP) 3           Guichet Unique du Bénin, SA (Project 9392)
                                                                  year and the Medium-Term Expenditure
Baseline (2014): 68%                                              Framework (percentage)                            Pipeline
Target (2023): 80%                                                Baseline (2018): 34%                              x Fiscal Reform and Growth Development Policy
(Source: P147014)                                                 Target (2022): 15%                                   Credit (phase 2) (P166115)
                                                                  (Source: PIMA)                                    x Statistical Capacity Project (tentative)
Reduction of backlog in administrative cases
                                                                                                                    ASA/TF (tentative)
                                                                                                                    x Tax policy study
                                                                                                                    x Support to Poverty Analysis and Monitoring and
                                                                                                                       Evaluation (tentative)
                                                                                                                    x Global Procurement Partnership TF (GPRCPT)
                                                                                                                    x Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest to
                                                                                                                       Support the Microfinance Sector
                                                                                                                       Supervisory Agency (CGAP) TF
                                                                                                                    x Supreme Audit Institution Capacity Development
                                                                                                                       Fund (SAIF) TF
                                                                                                                    x Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability TF
                                                                                                                       (PEFA)
Objective 4: Improving the environment for private sector investment and competitiveness
SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth; full and productive employment; and decent work for all.
SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
IDA 18 Special Theme 1: Jobs and Economic Transformation
IDA 18 Special Theme 5: Governance and Institutions
IDA 18 Special Theme 2: Gender and Development
Intervention Logic: The SCD emphasizes ways in which Benin’s achievement of the twin goals is constrained by a number of obstacles to competitiveness: bureaucratic
and administrative barriers to private sector investment and operations, and also the high costs imposed by poor and deteriorating infrastructure.
In effect, all the objectives listed under Focus Area 1 of this CPF address different aspects of competitiveness; these include barriers to value chain formation and private
investment in agriculture, improving the quality of infrastructure, and increasing the effectiveness and accountability of the public sector.
Objective 4 proposes World Bank Group actions more specifically targeting improvements in the investment climate and specific GoB programs aiming to promote cross-
border commerce, and in particular the promotion of tourism. Improved competitiveness will, over time, create jobs and improve economic growth in a number of sectors.
The Benin Cross-Border Tourism and Competitiveness Project focuses on strengthening the regulatory and institutional environment for tourism, while the World Bank
and IFC are contributing through providing finance for SMEs along the tourism value chains through a US$10 million RSF program with Bank of Africa Benin, for a maximum
target SME portfolio size of up to US$20 million. Beyond this, the World Bank Group will discuss with the GoB ways it can further support the development of a modern




                                                                                     45
export economy through strong investment climate reforms, follow-up support to the commercial court system, strengthening of export and invest promotion functions,
access to markets for export-oriented firms, and development of entrepreneurial skills.
Additional private investment by firms in tourism sector        Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises           Ongoing
(US$)                                                           (MSMEs) receiving technical support           Benin Cross Border Tourism and Competitiveness
Baseline (2016): 0                                              (Number)                                      Project (P149117)
Target (2023): 10 million                                       Baseline (2016): 0
(Source: P149117)                                               Target (2021): 1,000                          Pipeline
                                                                (Of which 30% are female owned)               x Potential new competitiveness operation
Benin Doing Business "Distance to Frontier" score
Baseline (2018): 50.47 (DB18)                                   (Source: P149117)                             IFC/MIGA
Target (2023): 61 (DB22)                                                                                      IFC: BOA BENIN AMSMETA (602177)
(Source: Doing Business)                                        One stop shop for construction permits is     IFC: Invest West Africa Benin Implementation
                                                                established and will be fully automated by    (601619)
Value of SME loans outstanding (US$)                            2023 (Source: new operation)                  IFC: GTFP Ecobank Benin (27518)
Baseline (2017): 6,800,000                                                                                    IFC: RSF Benin Tourism (38159)
Target (2023): 274,600,000                                      Investment and export promotion agency        IFC: Diamond Benin (25280)
(Source: IFC 602177)                                            APIEX (Agence de Promotion des                Potential MIGA guarantees for foreign investors into
                                                                Investissements) is fully staffed and will be the tourism sector (for example, hotels)
                                                                operational by 2021 (Source: new operation)

Focus Area 2: Investing in Human Capital
Intervention Logic: The PAG considers investing in human capital a top priority for Benin’s development. The PAG places special emphasis on the need to help create
more formalized employment opportunities for Benin’s burgeoning youth population, to improve health, education, and social insurance and protection. The SCD
pointed out that low human capital is undermining the prospects of the poor to realize shared prosperity, as reflected in disparities between the poorest and wealthiest
households, lower learning outcomes for poorer households, and lagging educational attainment of girls. Children from poor families have higher rates of malnutrition
and lower levels of access to adequate food/care, water and sanitation, and health services. Demographic pressures are overwhelming the current pace of growth, job
creation, and the expansion of basic social services, thereby limiting opportunities for poor households. The World Bank Group will build on its long experience in
education improvements in Benin and its successful piloting of Benin’s first social safety net program of notable size to strengthen the human capital, which the SCD
identified as an important determinant of long-run growth.

Objective 5: Improving relevance of education and professional training for strengthened job creation
SDG 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all
SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth; full and productive employment; and decent work for all
SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
IDA 18 Special Theme 1: Jobs and Economic Transformation
IDA 18 Special Theme 5: Governance and Institutions



                                                                                   46
    IDA 18 Special Theme 2: Gender and Development
    Intervention Logic: The SCD and PAG highlight improving educational outcomes as fundamental to achieving Benin’s development goals, in particular, in preparing Benin’s
    youth for modern and formal sector employment, and with a special focus on reaching the rural poor and women. Disparities in access to education exist in Benin across
    wealth, gender, and geographical groups. Notably, while girls and boys access the last grade of primary school at nearly equal rates, gender disparities increase as girls
    and boys progress beyond that level. As noted in the CLR, the World Bank Group has long and successful experience in working with the GoB on basic education issues.
    The CPF will support the development of human capital at strategic points in the education for employability process. The next phase of the Benin GPE Program will extend
    its scope to include lower secondary education and reinforce the institutional framework for and governance of the overall education system. The proposed Education for
    Employability project will help youth acquire the skills needed in priority and promising economic sectors with growing demand for skilled labor, complemented by the
    Centers of Excellence regional program that helps select universities produce graduates with high-level skills for key industries, and the ongoing Youth Employment Project
    targeting apprenticeships and self-employment for underemployed youth who have not completed formal basic education. The World Bank is also exploring with the
    Government a Youth at Risk intervention to improve inclusion of youth at risk in selected communities. Equal opportunity for girls to access relevant services will be
    included in all operations.
    CPF Objective Indicators                                           Supplementary Progress Indicators                  World Bank Group Program
    Youth creating, expanding, or diversifying their economic             Youth completing entrepreneurship training           Ongoing
    activity 9 (number)                                                   and receiving start-up capital (number)              x Youth Employment (FY14; P132667)
    Baseline (2018): 0                                                    Baseline (2018): 5,000 (of which 2,500               x Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence for
    Target (2023): 8,000 (of which 4,000 women).                          women)                                                 Development Impact Project (P164546)
    (Source: P132667 tracer study)                                        Target (2023): 10,000 (of which 5,000
                                                                          women)                                               Pipeline
    Students completing postsecondary training programs in key            (Source: P132667)                                    x Sahel Women’s Empowerment and Demographics
    economic sectors (number) 10                                                                                                  (SWEDD) Additional Financing (Benin) (FY19,
    Baseline (2018): 0                                                    Postbasic education programs developed in               P166813)
    Target (2023): 10,000 (gender-disaggregated)                          consultation with the private sector                 x GPE Program TF
    (Source: new operation Education for Employability)                   (number)                                             x Youth at risk (early pipeline, FY20)
                                                                          Baseline (2018): 0                                   x Education for Employability project (tentative)
                                                                          Target (2023): 5                                     ASA
                                                                          (Source: new operation Education for                 x Education Sector Review (P153478)
                                                                          Employability)                                       x Gender and Youth Employment in Benin (P147780)
                                                                                                                               x Policy Reform on Teacher Employability and
                                                                                                                                  Standards (tentative)
                                                                                                                               x Early Learning Partnership (ELP)TF (tentative)
    Objective 6: Improving social protection systems
    SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture

9   Indicator measures number of underemployed youth who start a new economic activity, or expand their existing economic activity (increased number of hours worked or increased profit).
10   Key economic sectors to include agriculture, science and technology, IT.


                                                                                             47
SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages
SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
IDA 18 Special Theme 5: Governance and Institutions
IDA 18 Special Theme 2: Gender and Development
Intervention Logic: The SCD and PAG emphasize the need to improve the coverage and administration of social protection programs for the poor. A high priority for the
GoB is to extend pension and health insurance coverage, now largely limited to formal sector employees, to several categories of informal sector workers and in doing
so decrease the risk to the elderly and the working poor that an unforeseen economic shock or health emergency will throw them deeper into poverty. Meanwhile,
improving outcomes in health, especially for women and children, are essential in promoting more inclusive growth and breaking the intergenerational cycle of poverty.
Child nutrition is a particularly high priority for Benin to avoid physical stunting and other medical problems among the youth who will form the workforce for a
modernizing future economy.
The ACCESS project will support the development of a national social protection platform (including a social registry, linkages to ID systems, payment systems, and
grievance redress) that will serve multiple programs, including ARCH in addition to ACCESS. Ongoing World Bank Group TA to the Government’s flagship social insurance
program (ARCH) is expected to assist the Government to establish the regulatory and institutional basis for a viable pension system and a health insurance system to
support the Government’s plans for universal access. The new Early Years Nutrition and Child Development Project (FY19) will build on the successes of the
Multisectoral Food Health Nutrition Project to increase the coverage and utilization of community-based child development and nutrition interventions. The CPF will
include support for Benin to join REDISSE to strengthen health systems for better preparedness and response to epidemic diseases. Most operations under this objective
will have a specific focus on women and girls.
CPF Objective Indicators                                              Supplementary Progress Indicators             World Bank Group Program

Number of households enrolled in national social registry of    ARCH design for health and pension              Ongoing
potential beneficiaries for social programs (number)            component is implemented in pilot areas         x Benin Multisectoral Food Health Nutrition Project
Baseline (2018): 232,000                                        Baseline (2018): No ARCH design                   (P143652)
Target (2023): 800,000                                          Target: (2020): ARCH is implemented in pilot
(Source: P163560)                                               area                                            Pipeline
                                                                (Source: ARCH TA)                               x Community and Local Government Basic Social
Children 0–59 months who benefit from an integrated                                                                Services Project (ACCESS Project) (P163560)
package of nutrition and early childhood development            Nutrition care group members trained and        x Early Years Nutrition and Child Development
interventions (number)                                          providing services to households                   Project (FY19, P166211)
Baseline (2017): 0                                              Baseline (2018): 0                              x Sahel Women’s Empowerment and Demographics
Target (2023): 800,000                                          Target (2019): 12,000                              (SWEDD) Additional Financing (Benin) (FY19,
(Source: P166211)                                               (gender disaggregated)                             P166813)
                                                                (Source: P166211)                               x West Africa Regional Disease Surveillance Systems
                                                                                                                   Enhancement Project (REDISSE, AF, P159040)
                                                                                                                x ARCH health and pension project (tentative)

                                                                                                                ASA



                                                                                 48
                                                                                                                      x Support to ARCH (Health and Pension) ASA
                                                                                                                        (P164230)
                                                                                                                      x Impact Evaluation of Health Result-Based Financing
                                                                                                                        (P125066)
                                                                                                                      x Scaling Up Social Protection (P163561, Rapid Social
                                                                                                                        Response TF)
                                                                                                                      x Regional TA to Support to Extending Pension
                                                                                                                        Coverage to Informal Sector Workers (includes
                                                                                                                        Benin) (RSR TF financed)
                                                                                                                      x Scaling up Nutrition (SUN) TF (tentative)

Focus Area 3: Increasing Resilience and Reducing Climate-Related Vulnerability
Intervention Logic: Benin is vulnerable in several respects: It is a small country with a high proportion of its population living in poverty and marginal conditions whose
well-being is highly vulnerable to climate change and rapidly changing market conditions. Increasing their resilience begins with helping the communities in which they
live to identify and prioritize risks, manage development planning, and implement and monitor development activities on their own so as to be able to adapt to changing
circumstances in ways appropriate to local conditions. Local governments, which have responsibility for most basic services, need increased capacity to be able to promote
and protect their citizens’ well-being. At the national level, it means assisting the GoB with its response to externalities beyond its control, including coping with the wide
range of climate change impacts affecting its major economic sectors and human and natural capital.
Objective 7: Building resilience at the community level
SDG 11: Sustainable cities and communities
SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages
SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
IDA 18 Special Theme 5: Governance and Institutions
IDA 18 Special Theme 2: Gender and Development
Intervention Logic: Building resilience among Benin’s poorest communities, both in cities and in small rural communes, will require improving access to basic services
and strengthening and improving the coverage and targeting of social safety nets to reduce the risk of households falling into poverty as a result of economic, social, and
natural disaster shocks and to enable households to improve their welfare. Lacking adequate social protection and with limited savings and insurance, the poor are more
exposed to shocks (bad weather, plummeting commodity prices, increases in consumer prices, accidents, disease, and so on) that can push households into or deeper
into poverty. As the CLR notes, the World Bank Group has had successful experience in community-based projects in Benin. The essential elements of the World Bank
Group’s approach to increased resilience for communities in Benin will include the Social Safety Net program under the new ACCESS project, which will increase
resilience for the poor in rural communes, through Unconditional Cash Transfer to targeted households, and labor-intensive public works to provide the opportunity to
earn an additional transfer during the agricultural lean season. Women will be a priority target group for income-generating activities. Increased resilience for the poor
in urban areas is promoted by the Cities Support Project that supports municipalities to improve their performance and service delivery. ACCESS will also build
Government capacity for implementing commune-level investment projects and decentralized delivery of basic public services, while also building the capacity of
grassroots organizations to participate in both planning processes and implementation.




                                                                                      49
 CPF Objective Indicators                                                Supplementary Progress Indicators                  World Bank Group Program
 Beneficiaries of safety nets programs (number of households)            Communities that have received grassroots          Ongoing
 Baseline (2017): 12,983                                                 management training                                x Benin Cities Support Project (P122950)
 Target (2023): 17,500                                                   Baseline (2018): 0                                 x Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage
 (Source: P163560)                                                       Target (2023): 360                                   Management Project
                                                                         (Source: P163560)
 Average rating of communes on the annual procurement                                                                       Pipeline
 audit rating scale 11                                                   Women in leadership positions in                   x Community and Local Government Basic Social
 Baseline (2018): 1.9                                                    community associations                                Services Project (ACCESS) (FY18, P163560)
 Target (2023): 2.1                                                      Baseline (2018): 0
 (Source: PSDCC -Projet de Services Décentralisés Conduits par           Target (2023): 40.00%                              ASA
 les Communautés - procurement audits)                                   (Source: P163560)                                  x Scaling Up Social Protection TF (P163561)
                                                                                                                            x Global Water Security & Sanitation Partnership TF
                                                                                                                               Support for Water and Sanitation Sector Reforms
                                                                                                                               (GWSP) (tentative)
                                                                                                                            x Global Financing Facility in support of Women and
                                                                                                                               Children (GFF) TF (tentative)
 Objective 8. Reducing vulnerability to climate-related threats
 SDG 13: Combat Climate Change
 SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
 IDA 18 Special Theme 5: Governance and Institutions
 IDA 18 Special Theme 2: Gender and Development




11   Indicator measuring communes showing improvement on the annual procurement audit rating scale, on 5-point performance rating scale, with 1=non-performant to 5=très performant).


                                                                                            50
 Intervention Logic: The SCD maintains that the effects of climate change constitute a serious barrier to the sustainability of advances in other priority areas for achieving
 the twin goals. Building Benin’s resilience in the face of climate change will require addressing issues across a range of sectors, including agricultural production
 technology, coastal erosion, forest management/preservation, and water management, to name a few. Objective 8 is particularly focused on the priority challenges of
 managing the impact of climate change in coastal zones as well as flooding in urban areas. In Benin, large numbers of the poor are located in coastal and urban areas,
 and the damage to productive land and infrastructure caused by erosion and flooding affects the poor most severely. Countering the effects of climate change,
 particularly in coastal zones, is both a national- and regional-level development challenge requiring coordination and multi-sector interventions across national borders.
 As the CLR notes, the World Bank Group has successfully engaged with Benin in its efforts to fight the impacts of climate change (this was a cross-cutting theme under
 the previous CPS). A number of World Bank Group investment operations aim to maximize climate co-benefits within a variety of sectors.
 Protecting the coastal zone from erosion and restoring fragile coastal ecosystems are the major objectives of Benin’s NDC for adaptation to climate change of the major
 thrusts of action foreseen in the NDC for adaptation to climate change. The World Bank Group is supporting these objectives through the WACA Resilience Investment
 Program. With deforestation exacerbating the impact of climate change in Benin, the Energy Service Improvement Project will implement community-based forest
 management plans in several municipalities, including reforestation, training on forest resource management, communication campaigns, and income-generation
 activities.
 CPF Objective Indicators                                             Supplementary Progress Indicators                World Bank Group Program
 Hectares of forest covered by community-based forest                      New forest management plans developed in              Ongoing
 management plans                                                          municipalities                                        x Energy Service Improvement Project (P161015)
 Baseline (2018): 0                                                        Baseline (2017): 0
 Target (2023): 300,000                                                    Target (2023): 3                                      Pipeline
 (Source: P161015)                                                         (Source: P161015)                                     x West Africa Coastal Resilience Investment Program
                                                                                                                                    (WACA) (FY18, P162337)
 Households in targeted coastal areas with less exposure to                Local-level planning committees in coastal            x West Africa Regional Disease Surveillance Systems
 flooding 12                                                               resilience with female representation                    Enhancement Project (REDISSE) (FY18, P159040)
 Baseline (2018): 0                                                        Baseline (2017): n.a.                                 x Forest and Desertification Project (FY19)
 Target (2023): 1,600                                                      Target (2023): 40%
 (Source: P162337)                                                         (Source: P162337)                                     ASA
                                                                                                                                 x Forestry and Biodiversity Assessment (P164413)
                                 13
 Decrease of tree forest loss                                              Hectares conceded to the private sector for           x TF to address climate-related threats and
 Baseline (ha/year): 22,400                                                timber and fuelwood production (number)                  vulnerabilities (GEF) (tentative)
 Target (ha/year): 11,200                                                  Baseline (2018): 0


12 The indicator measures resilience by design to flooding through infrastructure solutions, nature-based solutions and/or planned relocation. It captures absorptive capacity of resilience due
to the protection provided against flooding, and transformative capacity due to the planned relocation and creation of new livelihood opportunities. Less exposure to flooding means
decreased likelihood and intensity of flooding, due to project-related investments for houses and other immovable assets. Flooding is defined as a general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waters from the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.: Targeted
areas: Gbékon, Mono Lagoon. Activities: periodic opening of the river mouth, and others.
13 Defined as ‘Displaying tree cover and loss with >15% canopy density’, in targeted sites to be determined during operation design.




                                                                                               51
(Source: new Forest and Desertification Project)   Target (ha/year): 210
                                                   (Source: new Forest and Desertification
                                                   Project)




                                                                    52
                                   Annex 2: Completion and Learning Review

CPS of March 5, 2013 (Report No. 75774-BJ)
PLR August 30,2016 (Report No. 106266-BJ)
                                                                                                  Updated 3/28/2018

INTRODUCTION

1.     This CLR assesses the performance of the World Bank Group14 CPS for Benin for the period
FY13–17 (Report No. 75774-BJ of March 2013) as updated in the Benin PLR, (Report No. 106266-BJ
of August 2016). The PLR extended the CPS program period to FY18. The CLR also assesses World Bank
performance during the period and draws lessons for future World Bank Group interventions in Benin.

2.       The 2013 CPS was supportive of Benin’s Growth Strategy for Poverty Reduction (Stratégie
de Croissance pour la Réduction de la Pauvreté, [SCRP]), and its longer-term development strategy
entitled Alafia 2025. Outcomes are grouped around a Foundation Pillar of strengthening governance
and public sector capacity, with Pillars 1 and 2 focusing on increasing sustainable growth,
competitiveness and employment, and improving service delivery and social inclusion, respectively.
The first two guiding principles for the CPS were (a) the reinforcement of governance in focus areas
through capacity building and (b) realism and selectivity given the country’s governance challenges
and capacity constraints. Other guiding principles related to improving quality at entry by ensuring
ownership, proactive portfolio management, and using World Bank resources to act as a catalyst for
other donor and private financing. The CPS called for a mid-term review in 18–24 months. The
program period coincided with an economic downturn in Nigeria due to the fall in oil prices and
elections, which were more disruptive than experienced in Benin in the past.

3.       The PLR of 2016 assessed progress in program performance and proposed adjustments
going forward. The PLR noted that the strategic objectives of the CPS remained relevant and
incorporated in the program the emerging lessons of implementation, particularly the modest
reduction in poverty during the program period and problems with economic management. The PLR
called for the World Bank Group program, for the remaining two years of implementation, to (a)
deepen the analytical work on the causes of poverty, (b) sharpen the poverty response of the World
Bank interventions, and (c) devote attention to the restoration of sound macroeconomic and fiscal
conditions. The PLR refined the Results Framework to consider the program as executed at the time,
and adjusted the pipeline in response to government priorities. In line guidance from OPCS, the team
(a) modified the Results Framework to make it more amenable to future evaluation, including the
adjustment of targets no longer reflecting reality on the ground, and (b) provided additional
justification for dropped and revised outcomes.

4.       The PLR extended the program implementation period by one year to facilitate more agile
responses to emerging priorities of the new Government, which took office in April 2016, and to
facilitate preparation of the SCD.

5.      The CLR rates the Development Outcomes of the CPS 15 (the extent to which the CPS achieved
stated objectives) and World Bank Group performance (design and implementation of the CPS
program). The CLR uses the Results Framework, as updated in the PLR, to evaluate CPS achievements.
The updated Results Framework included outcomes in 12 areas/sectors, which were measured by 32
performance indicators. This CLR is not an assessment of Benin’s progress toward its development
goals but rather of program achievements directly linked to World Bank Group-supported activities

14 TheWorld Bank, IFC, and MIGA.
15This report follows guidelines issued jointly by the Operations Policy and Country Services unit and the IEG in December
2014 with respect to rating methodology and categories.


                                                            53
and to World Bank Group engagement in Benin during the CPS period. The CLR was informed by
country team member discussions with the Government and stakeholders and a review of World
Bank documents, including Project Appraisal Documents (PADs), Implementation Status and Results
Reports (ISRs), and analytical work. The SCD, prepared in FY16 and discussed with the Government in
August 2017, was also an input to the CLR.

Country Context

6.       At US$800, Benin’s GDP per capita is among the lowest in the world (population 10 million
as per 2013 census). The economy is driven by agriculture and services, particularly import/export
activities through the Port of Cotonou. Agriculture accounts for 25 percent of GDP and 47 percent of
the country’s employment. Cotton is the primary export commodity. The informal sector contributes
up to 56 percent of GDP and engages over 90 percent of the labor force. Reexport trade with Nigeria,
mostly informal, accounts for 20 percent of GDP and 25 percent of government revenue. Benin has
experienced peaceful transitions of power following competitive elections since 1991. Presidential
elections were held in March 2016 and the pre-electoral period was particularly contentious. March
2016 marked a transition to new leadership. The new administration took office in April 2016, vowing
to establish a right-sized administration based on competence.

7.      In 2015, Benin maintained macroeconomic stability, as it had done in the preceding decade,
which laid the foundation for growth. Real GDP grew by 4.6 percent in 2012, 7.2 percent in 2013, and
6.4 percent in 2014. Growth dropped to 2.1 percent in 2015 as a result of Nigeria’s economic crisis, a
decline in cotton prices, and the political uncertainty and economic mismanagement preceding the
elections organized for the end of 2015. Recovery began in 2016 with GDP growing at 4.0 percent in
2016 and 5.6 percent in 2017.

8.       In 2015, in the run-up to the legislative and presidential elections, the outgoing
administration engaged in profligate spending, including on road infrastructure through
prefinanced arrangements. The extraordinary expenditures and borrowing resulted in the fiscal
deficit increasing to 8.0 percent in 2015 (from 1.9 percent in 2014) and continued through to March
2016. Many of the spending measures approved before the elections were canceled in 2016, including
wage increases and bonuses and some of the positions created in public administration. In addition,
the new government reduced the number of ministries and central institutions and significantly
reduced discretionary expenditures within ministries; the measures resulted in the fiscal deficit
decreasing to 6.0 percent of GDP in 2016. On the debt front, substantial amounts of government paper
were issued in the regional market 16 to finance the fiscal deficit in 2015 and 2016. This resulted in an
increase in total debt, which rose from 30.5 percent of GDP at end-2014 to 42.4 percent of GDP at
end-2015 and to 50 percent of GDP at end-2016. The Government has committed to fiscal
consolidation and improved debt management (including refraining from entering into new
prefinancing contracts) as part of its agreements with the World Bank and the IMF. The IMF approved
an ECF in April 2017 and the World Bank approved a DPO in support of Fiscal Reform and Growth, in
November 2017. Key measures associated with the programs are discussed in the outcomes section
below.

9.       While the fight against poverty has been prominent in Benin’s development strategy,
poverty reduction results have been modest during the program period. The economic growth
experienced between 2011 and 2015 was not especially pro-poor. Although there are differences in
available data, the 2016 SCD confirms that Benin experienced limited per capita growth and made
little substantive progress in reducing poverty and increasing shared prosperity this decade. In the
best of cases, poverty has gradually declined over the past decade. According to official estimates,

16   WAEMU.


                                                   54
presented in the PLR, national headcount poverty rates fell from 37.5 percent in 2006 to 35.2 percent
in 2010 and then increased to 40.1 percent in 2015.

10.       The disconnect between economic growth and poverty reduction during the program
period reflects in part the nature of the expansion which centered on capital-intensive sectors like
banking, telecommunications, and the port. In contrast, agriculture, which employs half of the labor
force, only grew at an annual rate of 4 percent, with its growth derived from increases in land under
cultivation and labor but with little increase in productivity as programs in support of nontraditional
commodities are just starting to yield results. In addition, population growth limited per capita growth
and its impact on poverty reduction, as did the economic slowdown in Nigeria, which decreased
opportunities for informal trade.

11.       There are serious policy constraints to poverty reduction. These include a tilted playing field
favoring established enterprises, including in the key export commodity—cotton—which has
facilitated elite rent capture to the detriment of poor producers. Governance weaknesses,
infrastructure deficiencies, and economic competitiveness issues also constrain growth. This has led
to low levels of public and private investment and a non-typical structural transformation where labor
has left low-productivity agriculture and has moved primarily into commerce and other services areas,
where productivity is equally low and indeed declining. Gender imbalances, high population growth,
and low levels of human capital among the poor pose constraints to households in benefiting from
economic growth.

12.     In FY13–16, World Bank support totaled US$379 million compared to a planned US$389
million. World Bank support in FY17 increased to US$173 million compared to the planned US$100
following the inauguration of the new government, which introduced policies that began redressing
macroeconomic imbalances of 2015. Total World Bank support for FY13–17 was US$563 million
compared to the planned US$469 million. In the same period, TF financing totaled US$80.9 million.
IFC commitments in FY13–17 were US$209 million, of which US$10 million was in long-term finance.
MIGA did not enter new guarantees during the period but maintained some guarantees entered
before the program period. A summary of IDA planned/actual financing for FY13–FY18 appears in this
annex.

Assessment of Program Performance

13.     The World Bank was proactive in addressing problems in program implementation and
responded to delays in reforms associated with PRSCs, by delaying effectiveness on the last policy-
based operation in the program (PRSC 10 [FY15]) and cancelling the last planned one (PRSC 11 planned
for FY16). Since FY16, the World Bank Group has focused on investment operations that focus on
growth and poverty. Also, the World Bank team monitored project implementation closely, which
improved portfolio performance; having World Bank Group task team leaders on the ground visibly
enhances project performance. A PLR after 18–24 months of implementation—rather than in August
2016—might have brought more timely focus to issues such as the need to strengthen the poverty
focus of the program.

14.     Overall performance of the CPS program (FY13–18) is moderately satisfactory. Most
indicators were achieved or mostly achieved. Performance under the Foundation Pillar is rated
moderately satisfactory and under Pillars I and II as satisfactory. Important progress was made in the
areas of agricultural productivity, which could help in the structural transformation of the economy;
in the development of instruments to promote private participation in the provision of basic services
(mainly water), which can be replicated; and in the definition of a safety net program. The CPS
performance in the FY13–18 period under the program’s three pillars, as revised in the 2016 PLR, is




                                                   55
summarized in the paragraphs that follow and in the Results Matrix (Annex 1 (a)). Table 7 summarizes
ratings for individual outcome indicators.

                                   Table 2.1. Summary of CLR Ratings

                              Rating of Strategic Objectives and Indicators
  Strategic objectives and indicators                                                          Rating
                    Foundation Pillar: Governance and Public Sector Capacity                    MS
  Outcome 1.1 Improved public sector capacity in public financial management                    PA
                 Pillar I: Sustainable Growth, Competitiveness and Employment                    S
  Outcome 2.1: Increased access to power services                                               PA
  Outcome 2.2: Improved transport and port services                                              A
  Outcome 2.3: Increased access to ICT services                                                  A
  Outcome 2.4: Enhanced business environment                                                    MA
  Outcome 2.5. Improved agricultural productivity and diversification                            A
  Outcome 2.6. Improved natural resource management practices                                    A
  Outcome 2.7: Labor skills development for youth                                               MA
                      Pillar II: Improving Service Delivery and Social Inclusion                 S
  Outcome 3.1: Improved flood protection in urban areas                                          A
  Outcome 3.2: Increased access to safety nets                                                   A
  Outcome 3.3: Improved access to primary education                                              A
  Outcome 3.4: Improved access to health and nutrition services                                  A
  Note: A: Achieved; MA: Mostly Achieved; MS; PA: Partially Achieved; NA Not Achieved; NV: Not
  Verified.

Foundation Pillar - Governance and Public Sector Capacity

15.     World Bank interventions were designed to improve public sector capacity in PFM (Outcome
1.1). The outcome in this area was most affected by the macroeconomic management and governance
issues discussed above. The outcome is rated as partially achieved. World Bank Group assistance was
to be delivered principally through four programmatic operations (PRSCs) and two TA projects and
was informed by analytical work and TA, although other programs such as the successful Community-
Driven Decentralized Services Project (P117764) also included public finance aspects.

16.     Three PRSCs supported prudent macroeconomic and debt management. Efforts in public
finance and governance reforms stalled by 2015, and issues including excessive government
borrowing and uncontrolled expenditures resulted in delayed disbursements of the third budget
support operation (PRSC 10), approved in FY15, and the cancellation of the last programmed PRSC
(PRSC 11). Under the PRSC series, some reforms were introduced to institutionalize program-based
budgeting, and the computerization of budget execution, accounting and reporting. There was some
improvement in procedures for public procurement, although practices did not follow the updated
procedures. The World Bank also supported, under the PRSCs (9 and 10), the establishment of the
National Anti-Corruption Authority (ANLC) and its regulatory framework; progress in the
implementation of the legislation was slow. Also, decentralized service delivery, transparency, and
accountability, a CPS objective, improved with interventions from the Community Development
Program and fiscal transfers to communes have risen, though largely driven by donor financing as
opposed to domestic transfers. The program supported by PRSCs was closely linked with IMF
programs. The World Bank was the main donor providing budget support, which made discussions on
sensitive reforms difficult. Other donors, such as the AfDB and the MCC, supported some aspects of
the program.

17.    Six indicators measured improvement in public sector capacity in FM. Three indicators of
budget control, including the execution of priority social expenditures, the time to submit national


                                                    56
accounts to the chamber of accounts, and the investment budget execution rate were met, and one,
the percentage of unallocated budget, was not met. The two CPS indicators on the predictability of
fiscal transfers to communes and communal audits have been met. The outcomes under this pillar fell
short of the expectations under the CPF. The 2013 CPF 17 relied on PEFA reports/indicators, which were
replaced at the PLR, as the monitoring reports had not prepared consistently during the period.
Although the PEFA indicators cannot be verified, the PRSC program, as implemented, is not likely to
have resulted in a significant change in PEFA indicator performance.

18.     Analytical work and TA focused on taxation, land, public investment, debt management,
customs, and accounting and debt-related issues. In 2015–2018, the World Bank Group prepared 13
policy notes to brief the new government on key issues, and these served as background for
preparation of the plan presented by the Government in 2016 (PAG 2016–2021, GAP). An SCD, which
was completed in June 2016 and discussed with the Government in August 2016, has provided the
analytical basis for the design of the CPF. Following the expanded borrowing in 2015 and 2016, an
intensive dialogue on debt and debt-related issues has become an integral part of the macroeconomic
engagement. The IMF and the World Bank carried out a DSA in March 2017. Total public (external and
domestic) debt is projected to rise during the planned expansion of public investment to about 53
percent of GDP in 2017 and 2018, and decline thereafter. The ratio remains below the indicative
benchmark of 56 percent, the levels linked to increased probability of debt distress in moderate-
capacity countries like Benin.

19.     A further concrete result of the World Bank’s support in the area of governance was the
introduction of measures conducive to transparency and accountability in World Bank operations,
an area highlighted in the PLR. The concept was first introduced in the Community Development and
Agricultural Operations. Access to information and grievance redress mechanisms have also been
introduced in the Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage Management Project (FY17, P156738).
A grievance redress mechanism is also being put in place under the Benin Cross Border Tourism and
Competitiveness Project (FY16, P149117). The Public Investment Management and Governance
Support Project (FY17, P147014) will help improve the efficiency of public investment and provide
results-based incentives to the energy, water, and justice ministries to improve the management of
investment projects.

Pillar I - Sustainable Growth, Competitiveness and Employment

20.      World Bank interventions in support of Pillar I objectives included investments and
analytical work in infrastructure, business climate reforms, agricultural diversification beyond
cotton, natural resource management, and youth skills development. IFC had a complementary
program that increased the effectiveness of World Bank Group interventions. The World Bank and IFC
together supported reforms and development of infrastructure necessary to attract FDI, for example,
port, electricity, and telecommunications. The outcome of the program under this pillar is rated
satisfactory, as the majority of outcomes were achieved or mostly achieved. In addition, work in
agriculture and telecommunications is expected to have a transformational effect in the economy.

21.      Energy - Access to power services has improved modestly (Outcome 2.1). This outcome is
rated as partially achieved. Of the four indicators measuring outcome, three were achieved
(establishing the infrastructure for bill collection, establishing light efficiency standards, and the
revision of the agreement on the Beninese-Togolese electricity code). A key indicator, on the
completion of the transmission-distribution system, was only partially achieved. The World Bank
Group has supported the sector through two operations. The first, Increased Access to Modern Energy


17 Unless
        specifically labeled as 2013 CPS indicators, ‘CPS indicators’ refers to the indicators in the 2013 CPS as modified in
the 2016 PLR.


                                                             57
(P110075, World Bank and GEF) approved in FY08 but implemented during the CFP period, financed
investments to improve the T&D to ensure system reliability and encouraged energy efficiency. The
project activities complemented support from the EU and the MCC. An Energy Service Improvement
Project (P161015) was approved in FY17. It aims to improve the operational performance of Benin’s
Power Utility expand electricity access, and promote community-based management of forest
resources. The program complements policy reforms relating to the Power Utility financing being
introduced under the Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit. The World Bank investment in the Adjarala
power plant straddling the Benin-Togo border did not materialize despite a substantial World Bank
Group contribution to project preparation, as the authorities decided to seek alternative financing
sources.

22.     Transport - Transport and port services (Outcome 2.2) improved and the CPS outcome was
achieved. Indicator targets were met or exceeded. A regional trade and transport facilitation
operation (P112456)—the Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transport Facilitation Project (APL1, FY10,
P096407)—helped reduce trade and transport barriers in ports and along the Ghana-Togo-Benin road
corridor. The time for merchandise/trucks to cross the borders with Nigeria and Togo along the
corridor, a CPS indicator, has decreased significantly, and the target was exceeded. Thus, the border
crossing time between Togo and Benin decreased by 58 percent, from 24 to 10 hours against a target
of 19 hours, and between Benin and Nigeria by 35 percent, from 48 to 31 hours against a target of 38
hours. The dwell time in the Port of Cotonou decreased by over 26 percent, from 19 days to 14 days
at project closing in June 2017. IFC supported the sector through a port PPP to assist the Government
meet its obligations under the concession agreement with a private operator to develop and operate
a container terminal for the Port.

23.      ICT - Access to ICT Services has expanded substantially (Outcome 2.30) and the expected
outcome was achieved. All indicator targets were met or exceeded. World Bank Group support was
delivered under the West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure Project (WARCIP) (FY12,
P130184). Improvements are reflected in a significant drop in the wholesale price and improvement
of quality of ICT services. Ongoing institutional and legal reforms and the delivery of a second
international connection are also making the ICT environment more attractive for business. The retail
price has fallen substantially, and the percentage of the population using the Internet is 12 percent
against a target of 4.2 percent. Although the prices for Internet services have been reduced
substantially, they remain high compared to the local purchasing power. Benin now has low-cost
internet capacity that can be sold to landlocked neighboring countries (Burkina Faso, Niger). There has
also been a marked increase in ICT SMEs with support from World Bank operations. Ongoing
institutional and regulatory reforms have increased Internet access. Also, there is a need to ensure
better access to broadband services for agriculture, education, health and SMEs, particularly in rural
communities. The proposed Benin Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development Project (P162599),
scheduled for late FY18, aims to improve access to affordable broadband in rural communities and
use e-services to improve supply-chain efficiency and access to markets.

24.     Business Environment - The Government has taken some measures to improve the business
environment (Outcome 2.4) and the outcome was mostly achieved. Two CPF outcome indicators,
the number of new SMEs registered and the number of PPPs approved during the CPS period were
met, but one indicator on the business environment, the number of days to enforce a contract,
decreased to 750 days from 825. This fell short of the 650-day target for 2016, but the period may be
shortened once the Commercial Court becomes operational. Benin’s Doing Business indicator
standing improved from 162 in 2012 to 151 in 2017, although Benin remains below the Sub-Saharan
African average of comparator countries. Some improvement was made in ‘Starting a Business’ with
the creation of the Single Window for Business Formation (“GUFE”) with support from MIGA and the
World Bank. IFC TA helped to implement the Organization for the Harmonization of African Business
Law (OHADA) Entreprenant status program, a new legal regime that encourages small entrepreneurs


                                                  58
to enter the formal sector through simplified processes. The World Bank provided investment
financing under the Competitiveness and Integrated Growth Opportunity Project (FY08, P104881 but
implemented during the CPS period). IFC partnered with Ecobank and Diamond Bank to improve
access to finance for MSMEs, and provided capacity building to strengthen the financial sector and
promote business growth. The World Bank completed a review of land tenure policy in FY16 that
provides a diagnostic of the new legal framework and makes recommendations to improve access to
land. Also, as part of the PRSC 10 actions, the Government introduced measures to improve the
business environment: the new Competition Law and a PPP law were adopted as well as a new labor
law, which is business friendly and eliminates difficulties of the old legislation.

25.     The World Bank and IFC, working together, contributed to an increased number of
innovative PPP investments in critical service delivery areas, a CPS outcome indicator. Six PPP
transactions have come online compared to the two planned transactions. The World Bank and IFC,
through joint TA in connection with the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), helped with the
conclusion of four PPPs for rural water services. This engagement encouraged the use of robust
contractual arrangements and improved risk allocation among parties. This experience informed the
design of the Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage Management Project (FY17, P156738).

26.      Agricultural Productivity - Performance in improved agricultural productivity and
diversification was positive and the planned outcomes were achieved (Outcome 2.5). World Bank
support has been provided through the Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project (FY11,
P115886) for which an additional financing (AF) was approved in FY17. It supported the (a) promotion
of large-scale adoption of improved technologies, (b) development of production and market
infrastructure, (c) value chain coordination and access to finance, and (d) institutional strengthening
for market participants. The AF also includes micro-projects in SMEs to create more jobs, especially
for youth and women. The West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program APL (WAAPP, FY11, P122065)
also supported the sector, and additional financing is planned.

27.      Most of the indicators increased substantially and the number of project beneficiaries—is
90 percent achieved one year before the target date. Inter-professional organizations have been
established in non-cotton crops. From respective baseline (tons) of 50.0 and 3.50, pineapple and Rice
yields were improved to 59.6 (60.0) and 4.53 (5.0)1. For maize, yield was established at 2.2 surpassing
the target of 1.50 whereas cashew yield which moved from0.45 to 0.62 need more effort to reach the
set target of 0.7. As areas under cultivation using new approaches expand, productivity increases are
expected to have an impact on rural incomes and poverty reduction. As of mid-2017, some 422,000
producers were participating in the program. The program has also supported the institutional
strengthening of the Ministry of Agriculture, which has started yielding results. The budget execution
rate of the ministry rose from 45 percent at the beginning of the project to 79 percent in 2017.
Agricultural diversification should help reduce the country’s dependence on cotton. The sector faces
political and governance issues, which past governments have had difficulties addressing. The cotton
sector was discussed in the CPS but there was no commitment of resources to the sector. The World
Bank provided limited TA in the cotton sector during the program period.

28.     Natural Resource Management - Natural resource management has also improved with IDA
support (Outcome 2.6). The CPS outcome has been achieved and all four indicators have met or
exceeded targets. Benin’s Savanna ecosystems have been protected through conservation measures
in the Pendjari and W National Parks, and CPS conservation indicators are on track to be achieved.
The program has provided institutional strengthening to the sector. The fiduciary capacity of Wildlife
Management departments has been strengthened, a PPP for protected area management is ongoing,
and the first phase of the alternative income-generating activities has been completed successfully
with significant positive impacts on gender inclusion, increased income generation, and reduction of
human pressure on protected areas. Participatory management practices for designated forest areas


                                                  59
were also introduced. Sustainable financing through the Foundation of West African Savannas (the
conservation TF) has been established and is currently operational with initial funding from the World
Bank, Global Environment Fund and Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW). World Bank Group
assistance was delivered through the 2nd Phase of the Coastal Transmission Backbone (FY08,
P094917, now closed), Benin AF Forests and Adjacent Land Management Project (IDA/GEF, FY13,
P131051) and Support to Protected Areas Management Project (IDA/GEF, FY11, P115963).

29.      Labor Skills - The objective of labor skills development for youth (Outcome 2.7) has been
partially achieved. The only indicator in the CPS, youth receiving professional certification, has been
partly achieved, as 1,870 have passed the Certification de Qualification Professionnelle (CQP) exam
against a target of 2,500, pending the organization of the next exam for 1,000 complementary youths.
Analytical work has been produced on Youth Employment and Skills and on the dual apprenticeship
system. An assessment of constraints to employment and productivity has also been prepared.

Pillar II - Improving Service Delivery and Social Inclusion

30.       World Bank Group support to improving Service Delivery and Social inclusion was broad (some
US$238 million during program period). World Bank Group programs were designed to (i) improve
urban water and sanitation, which directly impact health; (ii) support the expansion of decentralized
community services, which helped implement a social safety net program, which did not exist in Benin;
and (iii) directly support health and education sectors through specific operations.

31.      Urban water and sanitation. There was improvement in flood protection (Outcome 3.1) in
urban areas and the planned outcome was achieved. The World Bank delivered its assistance through
two additional financings of US$6.4 million and US$40 million, respectively, (FY14 and FY15) for an
Emergency Urban Environment Project approved in FY11 and two new operations a Cities Support
Program for a Small Town (FY13, US$60 million) and Water Supply and Urban Sewage projects (FY17,
US$68 million). Some 62 km of drainage networks in the project targeted municipalities were
constructed/rehabilitated exceeding the CPS target and will reduce the vulnerability to flooding in
those areas. All milestones set in the CPS were achieved: institutional arrangements for a flood early
warning system were established; a drainage master plan was prepared for key cities; and awareness
campaigns and sensitization meetings on flooding and disaster risk management were developed and
are in place. Urban infrastructure management has improved for all participating municipalities, with
strong, community-based, participatory investment decision making.

32.      Safety Nets - Substantial progress has been made in increasing access to social safety nets
(Outcome 3.2) and the CPS objective was achieved. World Bank support has been provided through
the Community-Driven Decentralized Services Project (P117764), which closed in December 2017 and
for which a follow-up operation is being prepared (FY18). World Bank support has enabled Benin to
launch a pilot program targeted to the poorest households in communes with the highest poverty
levels and all indicators and benchmarks in this area were achieved. About 125 communities are
implementing safety net programs, and some 12,933 beneficiaries were reached with unconditional
cash transfers, above the CPF target of 12,000. A national targeting platform and social registry of the
poorest was developed and a scalable social safety net program using nationally agreed targeting
procedures that are shared with other major programs has been established. Targeting of social
programs to the poor has also improved, through a harmonized targeting methodology and a national
registry of the poorest. Temporary employment was created in labor-intensive public works safety
nets projects such as road repairs, refuse collection, upkeep of public places, and community
agriculture, with over 1.52 million person-days of temporary employment supported in the program
(against a target of 1.29 million person-days).




                                                   60
33.     Education - There has been improvement in access to primary education (Outcome 3.3) and
the CPS objective was achieved. World Bank support has contributed to improve access to basic
education in deprived areas with intake rate for girls in these areas increasing by 15 percent between
2011 and 2016. For the primary completion, CPS targets, initially set for 50.0, have been met, since
the primary education completion rate in targeted districts increased from 40.4 percent in 2011 to
54.4 percent in 2016. However, strong geographic and social disparities in the provision and quality of
primary education services persist and the gender gap widens as students move through the
education system. Future World Bank programs should seek to address these issues. World Bank
support for education was through the GPE (basic education) and on the regional Africa Centers of
Excellence project geared to higher education.

34.     Health - Access to and quality of health services and nutrition services has improved
(Outcome 3.4). All indicator targets have been met. By 2016, some 65 percent of the program area is
benefitting from community-based growth promotion activities. Some 366,000 children were
vaccinated in the project area, well above the CPS target of 260,000. In addition, most milestones have
been achieved. The World Bank has supported Benin’s Food and Nutrition Council to coordinate food
and nutrition sector policies and the management of community-based food, health and nutrition
interventions. Two operations supporting health system performance, and a multi sector food health
and nutrition project, were implemented under the program period.

35.     Gender - Cross-cutting Theme. The CPS called for mainstreaming gender in the Bank portfolio
(CPS, p. 68) and progress was made in this area. In 2014, a Poverty Assessment including a gender
analysis was delivered and widely disseminated. Analytical work on poverty since 2014 has also
focused on gender issues. Some projects included specific gender results and components. An
example is the youth employment operation, which targets fifty percent female beneficiaries, with a
specific sub-component to support females in mainly male-tagged trades. The decentralized
Community-Driven Decentralized Services Project (P117764) is gender oriented and women and girls
are targeted; of the 12,873 beneficiaries, 52.6 percent are women. The FY17 Small Town Water Supply
and Urban Septage Management Project (P156738) indicators call for 50 percent of beneficiaries to
be women while the Energy Service Improvement Project (P161015) approved in FY17 will address
the lack of access to electricity for poor female-headed households; create income-earning
opportunities for women; and increase women’s participation in decision making (some 10 percent of
beneficiaries are expected to be households headed by women).

36.      Climate Change - Cross-cutting Theme. The expected impact of climate change, especially the
projected rise in temperature and rainfall, will exacerbate Benin’s vulnerability. CPS support includes
direct and indirect links to climate change with interventions in natural resource management, coastal
erosion, flood and disaster risk management, and energy efficiency. The Benin Emergency Urban
Environment Project (P113145) has helped communities with flood contingency plans, technical
studies on coastal erosion sites, and a feasibility study for a Flood Early Warning System. Investment
support to forest and adjacent land management has helped rehabilitate about 7,830 hectares of
degraded forests, and enhanced carbon sequestration, surpassing its 2016 target of 7,700 hectares.
The ongoing Energy Service Improvement Project (P161015) is expected to result in significant peak-
load reduction by 9.8 MW (or 5 percent of Benin's peak load) through the diffusion of efficient lamps,
which will result in annual savings of about 18,000 MWh (2.6 percent of Benin’s annual consumption).
The accompanying reduction in GHG emissions is estimated at about 16,000 tons of CO2e per year.
Efforts to further mainstream climate change in World Bank Group support will be informed by the
Africa Climate Business Plan and new World Bank Group Climate Change Action Plan.




                                                  61
World Bank Group Performance

37.     Overall, World Bank Group performance is rated as good. 18 Most indicators were achieved or
mostly achieved. World Bank interventions contributed to progress in the areas of agricultural
productivity, which could help in the structural transformation of the economy; and in the definition
of a safety net program. The World Bank and IFC worked together in the development of the water
sector instruments to promote private participation in the provision of basic services that can be
replicated. The World Bank adjusted the program after the PLR and focused on social services and
agricultural productivity. The World Bank was proactive in engaging the Government, and World Bank
reports on the economy spelled out clearly the problems with governance and their effect on growth
and program implementation. There was close monitoring of the program but a formal assessment of
program progress was not conducted until 2016, which did not allow for the timely refocusing of the
program.

38.      The CPS was supportive of Benin’s Growth Strategy for Poverty Reduction and its longer-term
development strategy. The objectives of the World Bank’s program remained valid through the
program period. The CPS objectives are grouped around a Foundation Pillar aimed at strengthening
governance and public sector capacity, with Pillars 2 and 3 focusing on growth, competitiveness, and
employment and improving service delivery and social inclusion, respectively, and included policy-
based operations as well as investment projects. Although the CPS was prepared before the twin goals
of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity were spelled out as the World Bank Group
corporate strategy, the CPS addressed these issues. Pillar I aimed at improving governance, which is
central in improving government operations and the provision of services to the population. In tandem
with that objective, the other two pillars focused on increasing competitiveness, essential for growth,
and improving services to the poor, essential to reducing poverty. The CPS noted that the financial
assistance programmed could be increased depending on the government’s performance. The
streamlining introduced at the time of the PLR resulted in a better articulation of program objectives.
The CPS noted the various unsuccessful efforts in the preceding decade to restructure the cotton
sector, in large measure because of the vested interests, which affected government policies. The
planned analytical work and TA supported the policy dialogue with the Government and helped
develop programs and projects especially those aimed at the poor. The CPS noted that institutional
strengthening was a priority and would need to be addressed through all Bank interventions. The CPS
anticipated close collaboration with other donors, IFC, and the IMF.

39.      Risks were clearly identified. The CPS noted that Benin had been unable to capitalize on its
comparative advantages in part due to persistent weak governance, which had delayed policy and
institutional reforms and that this would remain a main risk to program success. The CPS also noted
other risks such as economic downturns in Nigeria. The governance risk is difficult to mitigate,
although the program sought to balance improved governance with support that directly impacted
growth and greater inclusion. Those interventions, especially agriculture and social services, were
effective in bringing changes in government structures and practices, which impact governance. In an
effort to mitigate risks, the CPS called for annual PRSC operations and associated TA programs which
were expected to support measures designed to improve governance, such as implementation of the
Government’s anti-corruption legislation and improvements in PFM. Going forward, one lesson to
draw for the CPF is the importance of being vigilant to implementation issues even ahead of the PLR
and the need to conduct a PLR in a timely manner.

40.    The results framework was generally well designed but had weaknesses in some areas.
Some indicators were not directly attributable to program outputs (for example, reduction of

18The design and implementation of the program contributed to the pursuit of the key CPS objectives and timely
adaptation to changing circumstances and priorities. A sound program of activities is in place for the next strategy period.


                                                             62
individuals vulnerable to flooding - Outcome 3.1). The framework was weakest in the public finance
area, which may reflect the governance risks identified in the document. Indicators dealing with PFM
assumed that the program would result in substantial improvements in standardized PEFA indicators.
Surveys to measure progress in the indicators were inconsistent and thus the results could not be
measured. In any case, it would have been difficult to assume that the program could yield significant
results in this area considering the risks identified. The PLR refined the Results Framework to take into
account the program as executed, modifications in the World Bank Group portfolio, and changes in
World Bank practices on results orientation.

41.     Program Implementation - In FY13–16, World Bank support totaled US$389 million
compared to a planned US$369 million. World Bank support in FY17 increased to US$168 million
compared to the planned US$100 million following the inauguration of the new government, which
introduced policies to redress the macroeconomic imbalances. As of March 1, 2018, one operation,
for US$40 million has been approved. Two additional operations, Benin Digital Solutions for
Sustainable Development (P162599) and Community and Local Government Basic Social Services
Project (P163560), totaling US$70 million, are planned. The 2016 PLR adjusted the program to
highlight basic service provision to the poor in water, and social services, scaled-up productivity and
transformation in agriculture, and improvements in transportation and the business environment to
stimulate investment and job creation. Planned and actual lending for 2013–2018 are presented in
Annex 1(b).

42.     The World Bank Group was proactive in addressing portfolio problems and IDA portfolio
performance shows an upward trend and has been moderately satisfactory over the CPS period.
When the risk of continued governance problems identified in the CPS materialized, the World Bank
adjusted its policy-based lending to reflect the continued challenge. Disbursements under the Third
PRSC (PRSC 10) were delayed and the last PRSC (PRSC 11) was cancelled. The program as implemented
focused increasingly on areas of success in the provision of basic services and increases in productivity.
In FY16–FY18, the World Bank has focused on investment operations that focus on growth and
poverty. A timely PLR after 18–24 months of implementation—rather than in August 2016—might
have brought greater focus to issues such as the need to strengthen the poverty focus of the program.
Experience in CPS implementation has shown that improved portfolio performance resulted from
rigorous portfolio monitoring with the Development Ministry, regular training of local staff, and rapid
responses to implementation issues. The presence of most World Bank Group task team leaders on
the ground has also visibly enhanced project performance. If it is not possible to have a permanent
presence in the future, there is a need for more regular physical presence of World Bank Group task
teams between six-monthly implementation support missions. In February 2018, the portfolio
consisted of 17 IDA operations totaling US$461.4 million, compared to 11 operations totaling
US$340.8 million at the end of FY12. Six operations were financed by TFs with a total commitment of
US$80.9 million. Disbursements have improved over the period. The percentage of problem projects
dropped from 16.7 percent in FY13 to 7.1 percent in FY16. During FY13–FY16, two of the planned
operations were not carried out: PRSC 11, which was cancelled following the performance on the
preceding PRSCs, and the regional hydropower project which was dropped at the government request,
which decided to seek alternative financing.

43.    TA has helped in defining government programs and World Bank operational work. Work
on debt management and wage policy continues to help in designing fiscal reform programs. Policy
notes prepared to brief the current government prior to its coming into office were used by the
Government in formulating its plans. The Poverty Analysis, initially carried out in 2014, and
subsequent analytical work on poverty and social programs, helped understand the causes and
characteristics of poverty and design investment interventions highlighting basic service provision to
the poor in water and social services.



                                                   63
Evolution of Partnerships and Leveraging

44.     The World Bank Group is an active partner in donor coordination and plays the lead role of
‘chef de file’ representing the community of bilateral and multilateral donors with the Government.
The interaction among donors has led to good coordination in areas of common interest, such as the
social sectors and agriculture. Coordination in economic management issues and governance
improved in connection with the recently approved budget support operation. Financing for budget
support financing has principally come from the World Bank. The IMF and the World Bank have
coordinated closely on the economic reform agenda including public finance issues and have been the
main partners in these discussions. Greater participation of key donors in economic policy and thus
on governance discussions would be important as the new government begins to implement its
program.

45.      Donor dialogue takes place at the level of heads of bilateral and multilateral missions,
between heads of technical cooperation, and regular meetings of 13 distinct thematic groups. At a
political level, the Ministry of State for Planning and Development chairs the joint Government-
Partner Steering Committee. A joint review takes place every year to assess progress with the
Government’s development strategy. A Round Table was held in Paris in June 2014 in support of
Government’s growth for poverty reduction strategy. In addition to the World Bank Group, Benin’s
traditional partners include the EU, AfDB, West African Development Bank (BOAD), Belgium, France,
Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland, the United States Agency for International Development
(USAID) and MCC, and the United Nations system agencies. Emerging partners, including Brazil, India,
China, and South Africa, increasingly contribute to Benin’s development agenda and participate
progressively in donor coordination.

Lessons Learned

46.     Lessons learned are summarized below.

47.       Weak governance and government commitment undermined the policy reform program in
important areas such as PFM and difficult policy and institutional reforms. Experience with CPS
implementation highlights the need for a concerted, action-oriented dialogue between partners and
the Government to address issues affecting economic management, and by direct association,
governance. In this context, the World Bank could consider undertaking political economy analysis, to
systematically identify key constraints to efficient economic management. The Country Management
Unit could also consider carrying out a governance filter exercise for pipeline interventions, such as
large infrastructure projects, which are especially prone to governance and transparency challenges.
Finally, the practice of incorporating citizen participation in the design, monitoring, and evaluation of
World Bank projects should be continued and enhanced as a measure to increase accountability and
a focus on results.

48.     Investment programs targeting the poor have yielded results and have led to meaningful
policy and institutional changes in the affected sectors; this is important in light of the need to
redouble the Bank’s efforts in addressing poverty. Experience with the 2013–2018 program shows
that investment projects that directly assist the poor in such areas the agricultural diversification,
community development, and health and nutrition have yielded quantifiable results and that those
programs have led to important policy and institutional reforms (creation of the safety net system,
community-based management systems, strengthening the planning and execution of programs in
the Ministry of Agriculture, PPP arrangements). Analytical work on poverty carried out in 2014–2018
points to the need to redouble the World Bank’s efforts in alleviating poverty, which remains high,



                                                   64
and the spatial distribution is uneven. The World Bank Group should focus on projects directly
affecting poverty. These projects should be put through a filter, which would measure the
sustainability and replicability of the activities being undertaken and the projects impact on
institutional reforms in the areas covered by them. In addition, the filters should ensure efficient
management of funds. Programs addressing poverty would need to spell out the spatial inequality
issues by (a) supporting activities that are of particular relevance to livelihoods of the poorest regions;
(b) rolling out reforms and investments in the poorest regions first (being planned for future World
Bank-supported health, education, and access to electricity ͒programs); and (c) focusing on
particularly vulnerable groups.

49.     It is important to quickly respond to changes in the country context and to monitor the
program in a timely manner. The World Bank was proactive in addressing problems in program
implementation and responded to delays in reforms associated with PRSCs, by delaying effectiveness
on the last policy-based operation in the program and cancelling the last planned one. Since FY16, the
World Bank has concentrated its activities in programs that directly focus on growth and poverty,
which have been effective. Experience with the CPS confirms the need to monitor implementation
closely and having World Bank Group task team leaders on the ground visibly enhances project
performance.

50.     The World Bank Group is most effective when all its institutions work together. The World
Bank and IFC worked closely in SME financing and pilot programs in water. In smaller countries like
Benin, sponsor standards, deal size, and weak human resource endowments constrain greater World
Bank Group-wide involvement. Earlier and more proactive engagement by the World Bank and IFC to
identify and develop opportunities for collaboration is necessary. The World Bank Group should
continue to explore innovative financing instruments that facilitate involvement of IFC and MIGA, such
as the recently approved Water Program which entails support from the World Bank and IFC in
arranging PPP.




                                                    65
                                                      CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
       Long-Term
                                                                                                                                      Lessons and
  Development Issues                                                                                     World Bank Group
                                         CPS Indicators                          Milestones                                        Suggestions for the
      Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                          Program
                                                                                                                                    Forthcoming CPF
  and Key Challenges
Foundation Pillar: Governance and Public Sector Capacity
Outcome 1.1. Improved public sector capacity in public financial management
Promote public sector    -Execution Rate of Social Priority           -Implementation of the new      Now closed/delivered:      -Government
governance and           Expenditures (%)                             anti-corruption legislation.    PRSC 8-10 DPO              commitment is a
accountability (Public   Baseline: (2011): 75                         Partly Achieved. The law        E-government project (E-   precondition for public
services lack access to  Target: (2016): >90                          was approved by Parliament      Benin) (FY10) IPF          finance reform.
e-application and e-                                                  and some of the                                            -Government
business)                Progress: Achieved (September 2015):         implementing decrees have       Active:                    commitment would
                         86.6%. (Source: Government macro report), been prepared. The                 Poverty Diagnostics and    facilitate appointment
Improve public revenue or achieved according to latest IMF report     anticorruption agency has       Statistics (regional TA)   of qualified staff that
generation and           and ICR for PRSC8 (100.60% in 2013 and,      been established, staffed       (FY17)                     can be trained in in key
management               81,2% in 2014). The IFM did not have a       and is currently functioning    Decentralized              positions.
(Weak public revenue     program with the Government in 2015 and (Autorité nationale de Lutte         Community Driven           -Participation of key
collection capacity, in  2016 and the IMF and Government did not      Contre la Corruption            Services Project (FY12 -   donors is needed to
terms of revenue         report on this in 2015 and 2016.             [ANLC]). Its effectiveness is   closes 12/17)              ensure dialogue.
generation and                                                        still in doubt.                 Public Investment          -Strong TA program is
efficiency of revenue    -Time required to submit national accounts                                   Management and             needed to support
collection)              to the Chamber of Accounts (months)          -Signed agreement between       Governance Support         preparation and
                         Baseline (2012): 9                           Centres de Gestion Agréé        (FY16)                     implementation of
Enhance performance      Target (2017): <6                            and the tax administration                                 reforms.
across public sector                                                  (Achieved. PRSC 10 actions)     ASA delivered:
institutions to improve  Progress: Achieved. Accounts for 2016                                        Social Capital Study ECW
service delivery (Weak   submitted in early June 2017.                -Simplified turnover-based      (FY13)
PFM performance                                                       tax regime for SMEs             Use of Country Systems
across public sector     -Unallocated percentage of budget (%)        included in national budget     TA (FY13)
institutions)            Baseline (2012): 12.4                        (Achieved. Included in 2015     Customs Service/Civil
                         Target (2017): <5                            budget. PRSC 10 actions)        Services Reform/Wage
                                                                                                      Bill TA (FY14)
                         Progress: Not achieved. Unallocated           -Update of national poverty    CEM (FY16–FY17,
                         percentage of budget for 2017 is 11.1%.       line and numbers.              replaced by Policy Notes
                                                                                                      series)
                         -Investment budget execution rate                                            Country Integrated



                                                                          66
                                                  CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
    Long-Term
                                                                                                                               Lessons and
Development Issues                                                                                  World Bank Group
                                   CPS Indicators                           Milestones                                      Suggestions for the
  Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                         Program
                                                                                                                             Forthcoming CPF
and Key Challenges
                     Baseline (2016): 66.3%                         -Promulgation of new        Fiduciary Assessment
                     Target (2018): 72%                             Customs Code (Achieved.     Statistics TA (FY15)
                                                                    PRSC 10 actions)            Support for e-
                     Progress: Not rated. Investment budget                                     procurement to ARMP TA
                     execution rate for mid-2017 (end June          -Approved decree on the     (FY16)
                     2017) is 89.2%, which points to good           general rules of public     Developing a Medium-
                     performance in this area. Data for 2018 will   accounting (Achieved. PRSC  Term Debt Management
                     only be available at end of first quarter of   10 actions)                 Strategy TA (MTDS, with
                     2019. Not possible to rate indicator at this                               IMF) (FY16)
                     point.                                         -Approved decree on         PEMFAR TA (FY15)
                                                                    nomenclature of the State   Debt Management
                     -Dropped/changed:                              Budget (Achieved. PRSC 10   Assessment (FY17)
                                                                    actions).                   Poverty Diagnostics and
                     -Wage bill as a % of Tax revenues (not a                                     Statistics (FY16)
                     major part of World Bank Group support         -Inclusion of citizen       DEMPA TA (FY17);
                     during the period); replaced with time to      engagement mechanisms in Risk assessment tools
                     submit national accounts to Chamber of         new World Bank investment and capacity building for
                     Accounts.                                      operations. Achieved in new implementation of
                      -PEFA Indicators rated B or better and        operations.                 projects in CAA portfolio
                     PEFA.                                                                      (FY17)
                      Sub-indicators, (World Bank Group support     -Guidelines for procurement Policy Note package
                     not focused on overall PEFA indicators).       of goods and services are   (FY16)
                     Time required to submit national accounts      adhered to by all MDAs      WAEMU program to
                     to the Chamber of Accounts (months) (From      (Achieved)                  harmonize living
                     PRSC9-10: Baseline (2012): 9 Target (2017):                                conditions survey
                     <6)                                            -Annual audit of            (tentative) (FY17)
                     ඵAdded indicator Unallocated percentage of     procurement contracts       Poverty and Inequality
                     budget, which has been more of a               (Achieved; annual           Assessment Geography
                     challenge in the past than budget              performance reports)        of poverty; Poverty
                     execution. (From PRSC9-10) Unallocated                                     mapping, (FY17);
                     percentage of budget:                          -Passage of the new Budget  Review of Land Tenure
                     Baseline (2012): 12.4 Target (2017): <5)       Framework Law (LOLF) by     Policy (FY17)



                                                                       67
                                                        CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
     Long-Term
                                                                                                                                            Lessons and
 Development Issues                                                                                          World Bank Group
                                          CPS Indicators                           Milestones                                            Suggestions for the
   Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                                 Program
                                                                                                                                          Forthcoming CPF
 and Key Challenges
                           ඵAdded indicator Investment budget             Parliament (Achieved)
                           execution rate.                                                                Pipeline:
Enhanced resource          -Fonds d’Appui au Développement des            -Resources transferred
availability for           Communes (FADeC) transfers to communes         through FADeC to be             First fiscal reform and
decentralized service      (days from the published timetable)            executed by communities         growth credit (FY17,
delivery and improve       Baseline (2012): 39                            for basic social                new)
capacity in FM at          Target (2016): Maximum 15                      infrastructure though           Benin Statistical Capacity
decentralized levels                                                      delegation of responsibility:   Building TF (new, FY16)
(Unpredictable transfer    Progress: Achieved/exceeded.                   Achieved: target was 15%;
to communes for            Predictability of fiscal transfers to          current value is 20.37%.        Other partners:
service delivery)          communes has been increased; for 100% of                                       AfDB, IMF, EU,
                           communes (from 39 days variance from           -Community involvement in       Netherlands, Canada,
                           scheduled transfer date in 2012 to 5 days at   construction of small           France, UNDP,
                           present (2015 figures)                         infrastructure has reduced      Switzerland, USAID
                                                                          costs. 22% as compared to
                           -Communes with audits and published            construction by communes
                           action plans to correct any revealed           without community
                           deficiencies (%)                               involvement
                           Baseline (2011): 0
                           Target (2016): 90%

                           Progress: Achieved/exceeded. 100%. All
                           communes undergo annual financial audits
                           of funds received through the FADeC with
                           action plans to correct deficiencies.
Pillar I: Sustainable Growth, Competitiveness, and Employment
Outcome 2.1. Increased access to power services indicators
Improve power              -Infrastructure for electricity distribution   -Construction of T-Lines and    Now closed:                  -Difficult to introduce
generation and             network established (km)                       Construction of substations     Energy Services Delivery     reforms in the absence
distribution (Poor         Baseline (2012): 0                             Partly achieved. All the        (FY08) IPF                   of government
network services; poor     Target (2017): 50 km                           substations are completed       WAPP APL 1 (2nd Phase-       commitment.
power supply and                                                          and energized. Of targeted      Coastal Transmission         -Recognition of impact



                                                                             68
                                                            CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
       Long-Term
                                                                                                                                              Lessons and
  Development Issues                                                                                             World Bank Group
                                            CPS Indicators                             Milestones                                          Suggestions for the
     Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                                   Program
                                                                                                                                            Forthcoming CPF
  and Key Challenges
quality of service; and     Progress: Indicator not directly linked to an     310 km of T-lines, 60% are      Backbone, FY06)            on invest and public
high cost of electricity)   operation. Target in Modern Energy Project        completed. Construction                                    finances of strong
                            of 30 Km of distribution network has been         completion is now               Active:                    electricity sector is
                            achieved but target of 260 km of                  scheduled for 2018, after       Increased Access to        needed.
                            transmission infrastructure has not been          delays due to construction      Modern Energy Services/
                            achieved.                                         company financial               GEF Energy Efficiency;
                                                                              difficulties and bill payment   followed by additional
                            -Infrastructure for electricity bill collection   arrears with EIB.               financing (FY09, FY17)
                            established                                                                       Energy Service
                            Baseline (2012): 0                                - The electrification of 7      Improvement (FY17)
                            Target (2017): 45,000 prepayment meters           rural areas completed.
                            delivered and installation launched                                               Pipeline: First fiscal
                                                                              -The Generation/T&D             reform and growth credit
                            Progress: Mostly achieved. 40,500                 Master Plan is completed        (FY18, new)
                            prepayment meters installed.                      and endorsed
                                                                                                              ASA (tentative):
                            -Lighting efficiency standards developed
                            and applied                                                                       Beninese society of
                            Baseline (2010): 0                                -Operationalization of the      electric power and PPP
                            Target (2016): Standards for at least 2           Electricity Regulatory          Knowledge product
                            appliances                                        Authority (ARE) by decree       (FY17);
                                                                              (Not Achieved: ARE
                            Progress: Achieved. Standards for compact         established by decree in        Other partners:
                            fluorescent bulbs and AC developed and            2014 but not fully              EU, Denmark, KfW, EIB,
                            applied                                           operational yet)                BOAD, WAEMU, AfDB,
                                                                                                              USAID,
                            -Revision of the international agreement on       -Multidimensional
                            the Beninese-Togolese Electrical Code and         milestones adjusted to
                            the law governing the Electricity Code in         measure realistic progress.
                            Benin                                             -New milestones related to
                            Baseline (2010): No                               Energy Master Plan; and
                            Target (2018): Yes                                Electricity Regulatory



                                                                                  69
                                                       CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
     Long-Term
                                                                                                                                       Lessons and
 Development Issues                                                                                       World Bank Group
                                         CPS Indicators                         Milestones                                          Suggestions for the
   Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                              Program
                                                                                                                                     Forthcoming CPF
 and Key Challenges
                                                                        Authority
                          - Dropped/changed:

                        -Reduction in power losses replaced with
                        infrastructure for electricity distribution
                        network established;
                        - Electricity bill collection rates replaced
                        with Infrastructure for electricity bill
                        collection. Both changes to reflect relevant
                        project goals.
                        -Lighting efficiency standards added to
                        reflect the climate change mitigation
                        portfolio.
                        -Electricity Code revision indicator added to
                        reflect energy policy reform
Outcome 2.2: Improved transport and port services
Streamline ports         -Port dwell time in Cotonou (days)             -Computerized port single      ASA delivered: Customs     -Despite improved
processes and           Baseline (2009): 19 days                        window established and         Assessment Toolkit ECW     indicators, transport
procedures (Long port   Target (2017): 15 days                          functional (achieved)          (FY13); Port of Cotonou    costs and trade barriers
dwell time, processes                                                                                  Operations Policy Note     have remained high
and procedures)         Progress:                                       -Road corridor rehabilitated   (FY15)                     under this “first
                        - Actual results exceeded target, at project    (achieved)                                                generation” corridor
                        closing (June 30, 2017) the port dwell time                                    Active:                    project. A more holistic
Improve the road        was 14 days—a 26 percent improvement            -Milestones on cooperation     -Abidjan-Lagos Trade and   approach on corridors
infrastructure network                                                  and awareness not              Transport Facilitation     and regional
to support economic     -Border crossing time of trucks/                measurable in CSP; replaced    Project (FY10, IPF)        integration should be
development and social merchandise along corridor (hours):              with milestones on:            -MIGA Guarantee (FY12)     taken, with a focus on
welfare                 Krake-Seme - Baseline (2009): 48 hours          Computerized port single       to Bureau VERITAS of the   policy reforms,
                        Target (2017): 38                               window and roads               Netherlands                institutional framework
                                                                        rehabilitated (above)          -Tourism and               and procedures at the
                          Progress:                                                                    Competitiveness Project    regional and bilateral
                          - Actual results exceed targets, at project                                  (FY16, IPF)                level; and a stronger



                                                                           70
                                                   CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
    Long-Term
                                                                                                                              Lessons and
Development Issues                                                                               World Bank Group
                                    CPS Indicators                         Milestones                                      Suggestions for the
  Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                      Program
                                                                                                                            Forthcoming CPF
and Key Challenges
                     closing (2017) the border crossing time was                              -Tourism and general       multisectoral
                     31 hours—a 35% improvement                                               SME RSF (IFC, FY17)        collaboration (for
                                                                                              -Cross-Border Tourism      example, transport and
                     -Roadblocks per 100 kilometers along the                                 and Competitiveness        trade).
                     Abidjan-Lagos corridor along the Benin                                   Project (FY16)             -A shift from transport
                     segment Baseline: 7 (2009)                                                                          corridors to
                     Target: 3 (2017)                                                         ASA                        development-
                                                                                              -Regional infrastructure   economic corridors,
                     Progress:                                                                gap analysis (ICT,         which tracks the long-
                     - Partially achieved: at project closing (June                           transport and energy)      term impact of
                     30, 2017) the check points/roadblocks                                    (FY17) dropped.            transport interventions
                     along the Benin part of the corridors were                               Other partners:            (for example,
                     down to about 4, a 43% improvement                                       AfDB, MCC; EU;             population density;
                     compared to a 57% target.                                                Netherlands                public and private
                                                                                                                         finance attracted;
                     -Rehabilitation of road infrastructure was                                                          opening up of lagging
                     completed, and HIV/AIDS treatment and                                                               regions; social and
                     prevention along the corridor have yielded                                                          environmental
                     positive outcomes. The establishment of                                                             impacts).
                     the Single Window and establishment of an                                                           -A more integrated
                     integrated port information system                                                                  approach—focused on
                     reduced delays, port dwell time and costs.                                                          investment and
                                                                                                                         services along the
                     -IFC supported a port PPP to assist the                                                             logistics chains, with
                     Government meet its obligations under the                                                           disbursement based
                     concession agreement with a private                                                                 indicators—would
                     operator to develop and operate a                                                                   help,
                     container terminal for the port: it assisted
                     in the selection of a construction/dredging                                                         - World Bank/IFC/MIGA
                     company at a reasonable price (around 28                                                            collaboration enhances
                     percent cost saving), which avoided the                                                             results.
                     termination or renegotiation of the



                                                                      71
                                                        CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
     Long-Term
                                                                                                                                         Lessons and
 Development Issues                                                                                         World Bank Group
                                         CPS Indicators                           Milestones                                          Suggestions for the
   Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                                Program
                                                                                                                                       Forthcoming CPF
 and Key Challenges
                        concession agreement. MIGA, for its part,                                                                   -Investment lending
                        financed consulting services to help set up                                                                 more effective in cases
                        the Single Window. In addition to the PPP                                                                   of weak governance
                        investment for the Port of Cotonou
                        terminal (Bolloré Africa Logistics) IFC is also
                        supporting feasibility studies for PPP
                        projects, including for the new airport,
                        three dams, and dry ports.
Outcome 2.3: Increased access to ICT services
Increase access to ICT  -Retail price of Internet services (per Mbit/s    -Adoption of a broadband       Now delivered/closed:      Indicators and results
services (Low access to per month, in US$)                                strategy (completed)           -E-government project      should be directly
ICT services)           Baseline (2010): US$125                           Achieved. Strategy delivered   (E-Benin) (FY10) IPF       linked to project
                        Target (2016): US$80                              2013. Implementation of                                   activities to avoid
Improve access to                                                         reforms continue, including    -West Africa               attribution issues.
internet and telephone Progress (2016): Achieved. The retail price        the repositioning of BTSA,     Communications             Data collection
services (Inadequate    per Mbits/s per month is between US$40            establishment of ABETIC        Infrastructure Program     mechanisms should be
access to Internet and  and US$80 depending on the technology             and a permanent regulator,     (WARCIP) (FY12)            put in place with all
telephone services)     used (LTE, WiMax, copper ADSL).                   the arrival of a second                                   stakeholders, in
                                                                          international connection,      ASA (tentative):           particular private
                          -Access to Internet services (number of         establishment of the           -Regional infrastructure   operators, at the
                          subscribers per 100 people)                     ABSUCEP; and decrees of        gap analysis (FY17)        earliest stage of project
                          Baseline (2011): 1.80                           the law on Electronic                                     preparation in order to
                          Target (2016): 4.20                             Communications and the                                    avoid delays and
                                                                          Post Office.                                              missing data.
                          Progress (2016): Exceeded. The percentage                                                                 Future intervention
                          of the population using the Internet is 12%.    -E1 capacity to link Cotonou                              should include a
                          Access to Internet services and prices for      to Europe (achieved - line                                provision to carry out
                          these services have been reduced                completed)                                                detailed and
                          substantially. Benin has now redundancy                                                                   comprehensive surveys
                          for its international communications and        -Strategy delivered 2013.                                 on key ICT indicators
                          low-cost international capacity to be sold to   Implementation of reforms                                 (unique subscribers,
                          landlocked neighboring countries (Burkina       continue, including the                                   affordability, usage,



                                                                             72
                                                      CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
     Long-Term
                                                                                                                                         Lessons and
 Development Issues                                                                                       World Bank Group
                                       CPS Indicators                           Milestones                                            Suggestions for the
   Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                              Program
                                                                                                                                       Forthcoming CPF
 and Key Challenges
                         Faso, Niger). Ongoing institutional reforms    repositioning of BTSA,                                      and so on).
                         should continue so as to ensure greater        establishment of ABETIC
                         access to broadband services. Also, more       and a permanent regulator,
                         efforts are needed to ensure better access     the arrival of a second
                         to broadband services for agriculture,         international connection,
                         education, health and SMEs, in particular in   establishment of the
                         rural communities. There has also been a       ABSUCEP; and decrees of
                         marked increase in ICT SMEs with support       the law on Electronic
                         from the World Bank operations.                Communications and the
                                                                        Post Office.

Outcome 2.4: Enhanced business environment
Promote private sector -Number of new SMEs Registered                   -Improved Doing Business       Now closed/delivered:        -Same remarks as in
growth and               Baseline (2012): 0                             Indicators (Achieved).         -PRSC8-10 (FY13–15)          public finance reform
competitiveness          Target (2016): 3,000                           Benin’s ranking has            DPO                          apply.
(Regulatory and                                                         improved (from 162 in 2012     E-government project (E-     -Good Governance
administrative           Progress (April 2017): Achieved. A number      to 155 in 2016), Benin was     Benin) (FY10) IPF            critical to improve
constraints impede       of projects are contributing to firm           identified as one of the top   -IFC PPP projects –          business environment.
start up and enterprise formalization. 2,100 SMEs registered as         10 global reformers for        Cotonou container port;      -World Bank/IFC
development)             Entreprenant. Other SMEs benefitting from      2015, but the pace of          and rural water initiative   collaboration enhances
                         World Bank Group programs of which the         reforms has slowed down        MIGA                         results.
Promote PPP (Lack of     number registered is estimated at 10,324,      since then. Benin’s ranking    -IT company, (MTN
access to finance)       including as Entreprise personne physique’.    changed from 158 in 2015       Spacetel SA (Contract
                         In addition, 99 ICT SMEs were established      to 155 in 2016.                enterprise: Spacetel
Promote inclusive and    through support from World Bank E-Benin                                       Benin) - US$1 million
sustainable growth by    (above target of 30).                          -Adoption of the OHADA         -Malian Hotel Promotion
leveraging the private                                                  Reform Program. Achieved.      Company (Societe
sector (Lack of          IFC TA helped implement the Organization                                      Malienne de Promotion
public-private dialogue) for the Harmonization of African Business      -Passage of a PPP law.         Hotelier - SA (Contract
                         Law (OHADA) Entreprenant status program,       Achieved. A PPP law has        enterprise: Compagnie
                         a new legal regime that encourages small       been adopted by the            Hoteliere du Golfe) -
                         entrepreneurs to enter the formal sector       National Assembly and          US$1 million



                                                                           73
                                                   CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
    Long-Term
                                                                                                                                   Lessons and
Development Issues                                                                                      World Bank Group
                                    CPS Indicators                            Milestones                                        Suggestions for the
  Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                             Program
                                                                                                                                 Forthcoming CPF
and Key Challenges
                     through simplified processes. A total of         signed by the President.
                     2,000 MSMEs were formally registered             Government and the World
                     using the streamlined registration process       Bank are currently working     ASA delivered:
                     of GUFE (business registration one-stop-         of the implementation          -Benin small-scale piped
                     shop), and 495 MSMEs were registered at          decrees to adjust              water schemes inclusive
                     CGA (a semi-private organization                 weaknesses in the law          business support TA
                     specializing in tax filling and payment          identified by the              (with IFC) (FY15)
                     support).                                        Constitutional Court           A Review of Land Tenure
                                                                                                     Policy (FY17)
                     -Number of days to enforce a contract            -Passage of a new labor
                     Baseline (2012): 825                             code. Mostly Achieved.         Now active:
                     Target (2016): 650                               The National assembly has      -Competitiveness and
                                                                      not yet approved the labor     Integrated Growth
                     Progress (2017): 750 (64.7%). Not achieved       code. However, a new labor     Opportunity Project
                     (Doing Business 2018 report). This activity is   law has been adopted in        (FY08)
                     not directly reflected in portfolio results,     2017. This law is business     -Cross-border Tourism
                     but the expected Court (Tribunal de              friendly and eliminates the    and Competitiveness
                     commerce) reforms may positively                 main problems of the old       (FY16)
                     influence the time for enforcement (in           legislation. The new           -IFC:
                     PRSC series).                                    legislation plays almost the   -Benin Investment -
                                                                      same role as the proposed      Climate Reform Program;
                     Also, as part of PRSC 10 actions, a PPP law      code.                          Ecobank and Diamond
                     was adopted and implementation details                                          Bank Benin
                     are being worked out. In addition, a new         Passage of Competition Law.    MIGA:
                     labor law was adopted in 2017, which is          Partly Achieved. The Law       Bureau Veritas
                     business friendly, eliminates difficulties of    was adopted by the             Inspection, Valuation
                     the old legislation, and plays almost the        National assembly on           Assessment.
                     same role as the proposed code that has          October 13, 2016, and
                     been under consideration in the assembly.        should be signed by the
                     Lastly, the President signed a new               President soon.                Pipeline:
                     Competition Law on November 2016.                                               First Fiscal Reform and
                                                                      200 SMEs have a business       Growth Credit (FY18,



                                                                         74
                                                   CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
    Long-Term
                                                                                                                                    Lessons and
Development Issues                                                                                      World Bank Group
                                    CPS Indicators                            Milestones                                         Suggestions for the
  Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                             Program
                                                                                                                                  Forthcoming CPF
and Key Challenges
                     -Number of approved innovative PPP               plan prepared (achieved)       new)
                     investments in critical service delivery areas                                  Benin Cross Border
                     (supported by World Bank Group)                  -Dropped at PLR:
                     Baseline: (2012): 0                              Preparation of an              ASA:
                     Target (2016): 2                                 investment code favorable
                                                                      to investment promotion,       -Impact Evaluation of the
                     Progress (2016): Achieved/exceeded. 6            and strengthened coalitions.   Entreprenant Status in
                     transactions. Through joint TA World Bank        Improved consensus and         Benin (FY16) Achieved
                     and IFC support by the Water and                 new implementation
                     Sanitation Program (WSP), four PPPs were         knowhow                        Other partners:
                     concluded for rural water services, over         (Not measurable)               EU
                     three sites (Gouounou, Sakété,
                     Zogbodomey) with an estimated total cost
                     of US$1.1 million excluding household
                     contributions. This experience has informed
                     the new Water and Sanitation operation.
                     IFC has concluded PPP investments for the
                     Port of Cotonou terminal (Bolloré Africa
                     Logistics), and in the health sector. In
                     addition, feasibility studies for PPP projects
                     are now in the process of finalization,
                     including for the new airport, three dams
                     including Vossa and Beterou, and the dry
                     ports.

                     -Dropped/changed
                     Number of days to enforce a contract
                     edited to focus on time dimension, not
                     cost.
                     -PPP investments approved edited to
                     reflect client relevance, and support from
                     both IFC and World Bank.



                                                                         75
                                                      CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
       Long-Term
                                                                                                                                        Lessons and
  Development Issues                                                                                      World Bank Group
                                       CPS Indicators                          Milestones                                            Suggestions for the
     Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                            Program
                                                                                                                                      Forthcoming CPF
  and Key Challenges
Outcome 2.5. Improved agricultural productivity and diversification
Improve agriculture    -Average yield (tons/ha) of food crops (rice,   -Area provided with small       Delivered: PRSC9-10         -Investment lending
productivity and       maize) in project area                          scale irrigation and drainage   (FY14-16)                   focusing on priority
diversification (Low   Baseline (2011): 4.0 tons/ha (rice): 1.2        services (Ag productivity                                   sectors more effective
agricultural           tons/ha (maize)                                 project                         ASA (delivered):            than policy based
productivity and weak  Target (2016): 15% increase                                                     Agriculture Sector TA       lending when
technological capacity                                                 11,728 ha June 25, 2017         (FY13)                      governance issues are
to process farm        Progress (2017): Achieved/exceeded. Rice:                                       A Review of Land Tenure     prevalent
produce)               4.53 tons/ha; Maize: 2.2 tons/ha.               End Target: 12,678              Policy (FY17)

                         -Average yield (tons/ha) of cash crops        -Share of beneficiaries using   Active:
                         (pineapple and cashew) in project area        new technologies                Agricultural Productivity
                         Baseline (2011): 50 tons/ha pineapple; 0.45   generated. 80% (Agricultural    and Diversification
                         tons/ha cashew                                Productivity)                   Project (FY11 closes
                         Target (2016): 15% increase                                                   12/17)
                                                                       16 technologies generated       West Africa Agricultural
                         Progress (2017): Achieved/exceeded.           out of a target of 20. WAAP     Productivity Program-;
                         Cashew 0.62 tons/ha; pineapple 54.5                                           followed by additional
                         tons/ha.                                                                      financing (WAAPP) (FY11,
                                                                       -Client days of training        FY17)
                         -Quantity exported of cashew and              including for farmers and
                         pineapples in project area (tons/ha)          extension agents                Pipeline:
                         Baseline (2011): 20,000 tons (pineapples);                                    -First fiscal reform and
                         25,000 tons/ha cashew                         Not a project indicator in      growth credit (FY17,
                         Target (2016): 20% increase (that is 24,000   Agricultural Productivity       new)
                         tons (pineapples); 30,000 tons/ha cashew)     Project or WAAPP. 180,000
                                                                       direct beneficiaries. WAAP      ASA:
                         Progress (2015): Achieved/exceeded.           432, 000 direct beneficiaries   -Land Policy Reform ASA
                         Pineapple 57,600 tons; Cashew 39,280                                          (FY17, new)
                         tons. This represents a diversification       -Creation and
                         relative to cotton exports, whose share in    operationalization of a         Other partners:
                         total exports decreased from 29.5% to         national agency for property    AfDB, Belgium, EU,
                                                                       registration


                                                                          76
                                                    CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
     Long-Term
                                                                                                                                       Lessons and
 Development Issues                                                                                     World Bank Group
                                      CPS Indicators                          Milestones                                            Suggestions for the
   Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                            Program
                                                                                                                                     Forthcoming CPF
 and Key Challenges
                        25.2% in the same period.                                                    Germany, Japan,
                                                                      -Milestone on resilience not   Switzerland
                        -Share of project beneficiaries using         measurable; new ones
                        improved technologies supported by project    added, (see above)
                        Baseline (2011): 0
                        Target (2018): 80%

                        Progress (2017). 80%: Mostly achieved. On
                        track to be achieved by target date.

                       In addition, the program has also supported
                       the institutional strengthening of the
                       Ministry of Agriculture, which has started
                       yielding results. the agriculture sector
                       program budget execution ratio stood at 79
                       percent in 2017 against a baseline of 45
                       percent at the beginning of the project. In
                       addition, the ministry is now monitoring
                       100 percent of its programs against a
                       baseline of 55 percent at the beginning of
                       the project
Outcome 2.6. Improved natural resource management practices
Improve natural                                                       -The FSOA Articles of          Now closed:                  -Investment lending
resource management    -Scores from PA-METT for Pendjari National     Association, By-Laws,          Community-Based              focusing on priority
(Poor natural resource Park                                           Operating Manual,              Coastal Marine               sectors more effective
management practices) Baseline (2011): 85                             Investment Policy,             Biodiversity Project grant   when governance
                       Target (2017): 93                              communication and fund         (FY08)                       issues prevalent in
                                                                      raising strategies are                                      economy
                        Progress (2017): Achieved. The PA score for   finalized (Achieved)           Active:
                        Pendjari is 94.                                                              -Forests and Adjacent
                                                                      -The ESMF and Process          Land Management
                                                                      Framework are fully            Project (IDA/GEF) (FY13)



                                                                         77
                                                  CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
    Long-Term
                                                                                                                                Lessons and
Development Issues                                                                                   World Bank Group
                                    CPS Indicators                         Milestones                                        Suggestions for the
  Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                          Program
                                                                                                                              Forthcoming CPF
and Key Challenges
                     -Communal marine and coastal biodiversity     implemented (Achieved)         -Support to Protected
                     sites, including wetlands areas are                                          Areas Management
                     demarcated and protected                      -Mechanisms or                 Project (IDA/GEF) (FY11)
                     Baseline (2011): 0                            arrangements for discussing    -Niger Basin Water
                     Target (2016): 3                              conservation of marine and     Resources Development
                                                                   coastal resources, including   and -Sustainable
                     Progress (2017): Achieved: four communal      mangrove conservation at       Ecosystems Management
                     marine and coastal biodiversity sites,        the communal and inter         Project (IDA FY07)
                     including wetlands areas (Bouche du Roy,      communal level are
                     Vodounto, Togbin-Adounko, Bymins) have        established                    ASA (delivered):
                     been demarcated and protected and four                                       A Review of Land Tenure
                     other sites are in progress                   -Baseline study of             Policy (FY17)
                                                                   biodiversity conservation      Coastal Erosion Multi-
                     -Number of threatened species identified in   measures. Achieved. Study      sector Investment Plan
                     the baseline study of biodiversity which      completed.                     (FY17)
                     benefits from conservation measures
                     Baseline (2011): 30                           -Community members             Other partners:
                     Target (2018): 35                             trained in integrated          KfW, UNDP, Nordic
                                                                   ecosystem management           Development Fund
                     Progress: The target of 35 species
                     benefitting from conservation has been        The constitutions of the
                     achieved.                                     inter-communal
                                                                   management councils
                     -Rehabilitation of degraded of forests (ha)   prepared and adopted.
                     Baseline (2006): 0                            Achieved.
                     Baseline AF (2012) 5,800
                     Target (2017): 7,700 ha
                                                                   -One milestone (Training
                     Progress: (2017) 8, 059 ha (Target            tools on integrated
                     exceeded                                      ecosystem management)
                                                                   moved up from 3.1. as it is
                     Dropped/Changed.                              related to this outcome



                                                                      78
                                                      CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
     Long-Term
                                                                                                                                        Lessons and
 Development Issues                                                                                         World Bank Group
                                        CPS Indicators                           Milestones                                          Suggestions for the
   Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                                Program
                                                                                                                                      Forthcoming CPF
 and Key Challenges
                          -Indicator on Rehabilitation of degraded
                          forests added, to reflect effect on
                          environment.
                          For indicator Threatened species, baseline
                          and target numbers and deadline (to 2018)
                          adjusted in line with project metrics.
                          Deadline adjusted to 2017 for PA-METT
                          scores
Outcome 2.7: Labor skills development for youth
Employability of youth    -Youth supported by the project receiving      -Eligible youth have received
is improved (official     professional certification                     on the job, technical,
                                                                                                         ASA delivered:
unemployment is low,      Baseline (2014): 0                             entrepreneurship, and life
                                                                                                         -Youth Employment/
but youth                 Target (2018): 2,500                           skills training. Some 4,624
                                                                                                         Skills Note (FY13)
underemployment and                                                      youth beneficiaries of labor
                                                                                                         -Tertiary Education and
nonparticipation in the Progress (2016): 1870. Partly Achieved.          market programs.
                                                                                                         Capacity and Training
labor force is high)
                                                                                                         Assessment Study (FY13)
                                                                         -The National Employment
                                                                                                         -Impact Evaluation of the
                                                                         Agency launched the
                                                                                                         Entreprenant Status in
                         Dropped-Changed                                 recruitment of commune-
                                                                                                         Benin (FY16).
                         -Youth employed following support               level employment agents in
                         dropped and replaced to reflect the results     charge of decentralized
                                                                                                         Now active:
                         framework of the underlying project once it     training delivery and the
                                                                                                         -Youth Employment
                         was approved, by Youth supported by the         development of new
                                                                                                         Project (FY14, IPF)
                         project receiving professional certification,   training curricula targeting
                         with updated and relevant targets.              the poor and vulnerable.
                                                                                                         ASA (new):
                                                                                                         -Jobs Assessment (FY16)
                                                                         -Recommendations on
                                                                         impactful employment
                                                                                                         Other partners:
                                                                         policies.
                                                                                                         France, Switzerland
                                                                          -Milestone added on new
                                                                         jobs assessment providing



                                                                            79
                                                        CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
     Long-Term
                                                                                                                                         Lessons and
 Development Issues                                                                                         World Bank Group
                                          CPS Indicators                           Milestones                                         Suggestions for the
   Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                                Program
                                                                                                                                       Forthcoming CPF
 and Key Challenges
                                                                           policy recommendations
Pillar II: Improving Service Delivery and Social Inclusion
Outcome 3.1: Improved flood protection in urban areas
-Reduce urban flooding -Drainage network                                   -Institutional arrangements   Now Active:
(Lack of adequate           rehabilitated/constructed in the targeted      for flood early warning       -Benin Emergency Urban
drainage infrastructure municipalities (kilometers)                        system established.           Environment Project
to mitigate the             Baseline (2011): 0                             Achieved. MoU between         (with 2 Additional
negative environmental Target (2018): 21 (updated indicator)               Ministry of Water and the     Financings) (IPF, FY11,
impacts of floods)                                                         National Flood Disaster       FY13, FY16)
                            Progress (2017): Achieved. 62 km               Agency (ANPC)                 -Benin Cities Support
-Improve access to                                                                                       Program (IPF, FY13)
urban services (Weak        -CPS indicators (reduction of households       -Drainage Master Plan         -Small Town Waste
management and lack         vulnerable to flooding; number of flood        prepared for key cities.      Supply and Urban
of access to urban          alerts) were ambiguous and replaced in PLR     Achieved. Draft completed     Septage Management
services)                   with indicator on drainage infrastructure in   and validation workshops      (FY16) with IFC PPP
                            targeted municipalities                        carried out.
                                                                                                         ASA - active:
                                                                           -Awareness campaigns and      -Global Index Insurance
                                                                           sensitization meetings on     Facility (GIIF) Regulatory
                                                                           flooding and disaster risk    and Policy Capacity
                                                                           management. Achieved.         Building TA (FY16)
                                                                           Sixteen awareness
                                                                           campaigns had been carried
                                                                           out by July 2017, higher      Other partners:
                                                                           than the 10 planned by the    Japan, UNDP,
                                                                           end of the project.           Netherlands, EU

                                                                           -One milestone (Training
                                                                           tools on ecosystem
                                                                           management) moved under
                                                                           outcome 2.6.
                                                                           Milestones added on:



                                                                              80
                                                    CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
     Long-Term
                                                                                                                                    Lessons and
 Development Issues                                                                                    World Bank Group
                                      CPS Indicators                         Milestones                                          Suggestions for the
   Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                           Program
                                                                                                                                  Forthcoming CPF
 and Key Challenges
                                                                    Master plan for drainage
                                                                    Awareness campaigns on
                                                                    flooding
Outcome 3.2: Increased access to safety nets
Improve basic social     -Communities implementing safety nets       Adoption of national           ASA - delivered:
services and enhance     program                                    methodology for targeting
safety net measures      Baseline (2011): 0                         the poorest by Council of       Poverty/ Gender
(Households do not       Target (2017): 120                         Ministers                       Assessment (FY13)
have access to safety                                                                               -Building a common
nets)                    Progress (2017): Achieved. 125             - National social registry of   national targeting and
                                                                    the poorest established and     registry system for safety
                        -Beneficiaries of Safety Nets programs      used by multiple programs       net and health
                        (number)                                                                    interventions in safety
                        Baseline (2011): 0                          -Originally no milestones;      nets TA. (P146298)
                        Target (2017): 12,000                       milestones added, at PLR.       (FY16)

                        Progress (2016): Achieved. 12,933                                           Active (IPF):
                                                                                                    -Decentralized
                        -Temporary employment indicator moved                                       Community Driven
                        to milestone, and replaced with project                                     Services (FY12)
                        indicators on Social Safety Nets more
                        directly relevant to key objective                                          ASA:
                        (Communities implementing safety nets                                       -Scaling up safety nets
                        program; and Beneficiaries). The public                                     (FY18-19)
                        works employment is a sub-activity of the
                        broader established safety net                                              Pipeline:
                                                                                                    -Community and Local
                                                                                                    Government Social
                                                                                                    Services (IPF, FY18)

                                                                                                    Other partners:
                                                                                                    United Nations Children



                                                                       81
                                                        CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
     Long-Term
                                                                                                                                         Lessons and
 Development Issues                                                                                            World Bank Group
                                        CPS Indicators                              Milestones                                        Suggestions for the
   Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                                   Program
                                                                                                                                       Forthcoming CPF
 and Key Challenges
                                                                                                            Fund, Belgian
                                                                                                            Cooperation
Outcome 3.3: Improved access to primary education
Improve access and       -Gross Primary Intake Rate for girls in           -Girls in grade 1 and 2 in the   ASA -delivered:
quality of basic         deprived districts targeted by project            deprived districts receiving     -Poverty/Gender
education (Access to     support (%)                                       school package. Achieved.        Assessment (FY 14)
and completion of        Baseline (2011): 100.5%                           (6/17) 267,866, higher than
basic education,         Target (2018): 117% (GPE June 2017 ISR            target.                          Now active:
particularly in deprived                                                                                    -GPE program TF (FY13)
districts)               Progress: Achieved. 118.3                         -Teachers trained by project     -Africa Centers of
                         Primary education completion rate in              in the deprived districts at     Excellence regional
                         targeted districts                                primary level. Achieved.         project (new)
                         Baseline (2011): 40.40% (Girls 34.3)              (12/16) 10,699, Slightly
                         Target (2018): 56.50%                             above target                     ASA:
                                                                                                            -BJ Education Sector TA
                         Progress: Partially achieved. 50.90% in           -CPS milestones on
                         12/16                                             mitigation measures to           Other partners:
                                                                           strengthen maternal and          Denmark, France, KfW,
                         -The indicator on gender ratio is at national     child health dropped (not        Japan, Switzerland
                         level and beyond the scope of World Bank          related to outcome).
                         Group support; replaced with similar              Milestones added (see
                         indicator of Gross Primary Intake Rate for        above)
                         girls in deprived districts targeted by project
                         support. The indicator on Primary
                         completion rate edited for clarity to cover
                         Primary education completion rate in
                         targeted districts. Targets adjusted due to
                         the data uncertainty related to recent
                         census update
Outcome 3.4: Improved access to health and nutrition services

Improve access and       -Number of additional children (under 1) in       -Average availability of         Now closed:


                                                                              82
                                                       CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
       Long-Term
                                                                                                                                       Lessons and
  Development Issues                                                                                        World Bank Group
                                         CPS Indicators                          Milestones                                         Suggestions for the
     Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                              Program
                                                                                                                                     Forthcoming CPF
  and Key Challenges
quality of health         project target areas completely immunized      essential drugs in health       -Benin Community
services (Poor quality    Baseline (2011): 0                             facilities. Achieved. (2015)    Nutrition (IPF, FY10)
of maternal and           Target (2018): 260,000                         78% (target of 85%).            -Health System
neonatal health                                                          Comparable data for 2017        Performance IPF
services)                 Progress: Achieved. (6/16) 365,864             not available                   (FY10)
                          children. 95% of target                        -Multisectoral strategy         Ongoing
Improve food and                                                         document for community-         -Multi-Sector Food,
nutrition security        -Number of communes engaged in scaling         based health, food and          Health Nutrition project
outcomes (Fragmented      up community health, food and nutrition        nutrition standardizing roles   IPF (FY14)
policies and programs     security interventions for women and           and responsibilities of         -Building stewardship
Ineffective sector-       children under five                            Stakeholders. On track.         capacity for food and
specific services and     Baseline: (2012): 0                            Under preparation               nutrition policies and
interventions, notably,   Target (2018): 7                                                               programs (TF FY16)
but not exclusively at                                                   -Coordination mechanism of      Nutrition Sensitive
community level)          Progress (2017): Achieved/exceeded.            multi sectoral nutritional      Agriculture & Capacity
                          Currently rolled out in 10 communes.           policy and programs at          Building of Small and
                                                                         central and communal            Marginal Farmers Project
                          -Children 0–23 months who benefit from a       levels. Baseline (2013);        TF FY16. Done
                          minimum package of monthly community-          Target (ongoing project
                          based growth promotion activities in           target (2019) 40: Progress      ASA:
                          targeted                                       (2017): 21 On track. The        -Impact Evaluation of
                          Communes                                       remaining 19 communes           Health Result-Based
                          Baseline (2013): 0                             have now started so project     Financing in Benin (new)
                          Target (2018): 20%                             target should be met be         (FY16):
                                                                         met.
                          Progress (2017). Achieved. 59.5%                                               Other partners:
                                                                         -Inclusion of food and          Belgium, Japan,
                          -Rate of assisted deliveries was dropped in    nutrition security priorities   Netherlands, USAID
                          restructuring and replaced with related        in Communal Development
                          project-level indicator on Pregnant women      Plan. Ongoing project target
                          receiving antenatal care during a visit to a   (2019): On track. Most of
                          health provider.                               the 19 communities have



                                                                            83
                                                       CLR Annex 2a Results Framework 2013–2018
     Long-Term
                                                                                                                             Lessons and
 Development Issues                                                                                    World Bank Group
                                        CPS Indicators                           Milestones                               Suggestions for the
   Goals (GSPR3)                                                                                           Program
                                                                                                                           Forthcoming CPF
 and Key Challenges
                          Indicator on children immunized made           food and nutrition in plans
                          more precise and to reflect project metrics.   in their plans.
                          Initial target was for under five children
                          immunized, but the data available (and RBF     -Social and Health Workers
                          related indicator) is for under 1 children.    trained on Community
                          Community workers trained not in project       Management of Acute
                          results; dropped and replaced with PDO-        Malnutrition (CMAM) On
                          level indicator on Children 0–23 months        track; 485 workers trained
                          who benefit from a minimum package of          by 2017 of the targeted 900
                          monthly community-based growth                 by 2019.
                          promotion activities in targeted
                          Communities                                    -Milestone on mitigation
                                                                         measures to strengthen
                                                                         maternal and child health
                                                                         dropped, not measurable.
                                                                         Milestones added on: health
                                                                         personnel training and
                                                                         availability of essential
                                                                         drugs (above).
Note: Indicator data from most recent project ISR unless otherwise indicated.




                                                                            84
                                BENIN CLR Annex 2b: Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries FY13–FY18
                                                        (figures as of March 1, 2018)

 FY                       CPS PLANS                          Projected                            STATUS                            Committed
                                                           IDA         TF                                                         IDA       TF
FY13   PRSC-8 (DPO)                                        30.0               PRSC-8                                              30.0
       Cities support Program                              60.0               Cities Support Program                              60.0
       AF Forest and Adjacent Land Mgt. (GEF/IDA)           2.0        5.56   Forest and Adjacent Land Mgt, (AF) (GEF/IDA)         2.0     5.56
       Regional WA Communication Infrastructure            12.0               West Africa Telecommunications Infrastructure       35.0
       Global Partnership for Education                              42.30    Global Partnership for Education                           42.50
                                                                              Building Resilience-innovation (GEF)                         4.60
                                             Total FY13    104       47.86                                         Total FY13    127.0   52.66

FY14   PRSC-9 (new series)                                 30.0               PRSC-9                                              20.0
       Youth Employment                                    35.0               Youth Employment (AF)                               35.0
       Multi-Sectoral Food/Health and Nutrition            30.0               Multi-Sectoral Food/Health and Nutrition            28.0
       Africa Centers of Excellence                        5.0                Africa Centers of Excellence                         5.0
                                                                              Emergency Urban Environment (AF)                     6.4
                                             Total FY14    100                                                      Total FY14    94.4

FY15   PSRC-10                                             20.0               PRSC-10                                             20.0
       Capacity Building Operation (multisector)           25.0               FY16
       Cross-border SEZ                                    50.0
       Regional Adjarala Hydropower                        20.0               Dropped
                                                                              West Afr. Niger River Basin Man. (multi-donor       26.5     7.50
                                                                              TF)
                                                                              West Africa Upper Volta Afr. TF/GEF                         10.70
                                             Total FY15   115.0                                                     Total FY15    46.5    18.20
FY16   PRSC-11                                             20.0               Postponed/merged into new series
       AF Urban Environment                               30.0                Urban Environment (second AF)                       40.0
       Regional Transport DPO                              TBD                Cross-border tourism and competitiveness            50.0
         Public Investment Management-Public Support                          Public Investment Management (grant)                30.0
                                         Total FY16       50.0                                                      Total FY16   120.0
                                      Total FY13–16       369.0                                                 Total FY13–16    387.9    80.90




                                                                    85
  FY                         CPS PLANS                             Projected                            STATUS                           Committed
                                                                 IDA         TF                                                        IDA      TF
 FY17     PSRC new series                                       20–30
          Energy Climate Change                                  TBD               Energy Service Improvement                           60.0
          Community Driven Decentralized Services 2              TBD
          WAAPP-1C Phase 2                                       TBD
                                                                                   Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage            68.0
                                                                                   Agricultural Productivity-Diversification (AF)       45.0

                                                 Total FY17     90.0–                                                     Total FY17   173.0
                                                                100.0
                                                                459.0–                                                                 563.9   80.90
                                         CPS Total FY13–17
                                                                469.0

                                                         PLR Additions - FY17 and FY18
FY17/18   Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (DPO)                                                                                         40.0
          West Africa Agricultural Productivity (AF)
                                                  Total FY17     n.a.
                                                                                   Fiscal Reform and Growth -DPO (actual)               40.0
                                                                                   West Africa Agricultural Productivity (AF)           20.0
                                                                                   (programmed)
                                                                                   Digital Solutions for Sustainable Development        30.0
                                                                                   (programmed)
                                                                                      Community and Local Government Basic Social       40.0
                                                                                                               Services (programmed)
                                                 Total FY18      n.a.                           Sub Total FY18 up to November 2017     130.0

          ACGF AFRICA CATALYTIC GROWTH FUND; GEF:
          Global Environmental Facility




                                                                          86
                            CLR Annex 2c - IFC and MIGA Program 2013–2018

1.      In addition to the programs in the financial sector, business environment, and infrastructure,
which are discussed in the sections on the business environment and transport above, IFC supported the
health sector through PPPs. The Benin Health PPP project was designed to support Government in
procuring a private partner to design-build-finance-operate a new 250-bed public referral hospital in
Cotonou. The steering committee approved IFC’s recommendation for the Government to fund hospital
construction and equipping, but the Government was ultimately unable to raise the funding.

2.     IFC has also been working on a rural electrification project with an international investor to
provide power to about 15,000 people, but the project is on hold pending the new government’s
confirmation of interest. IFC also provided a €6 million guarantee to generator suppliers APR and Aggreko
on behalf of the utility SBEE for ~100 MW. The guarantee was required to enable the transaction. Moving
forward, in energy, IFC is focusing on supporting independent power producer development.

3.      IFC also contributed to the World Bank Group-wide Tourism and Competitiveness Project. The IFC
component will provide finance for SMEs along the tourism value chain through a US$10 million RSF
program with Bank of Africa for a maximum target SME portfolio size of up to US$20 million, which could
benefit Benin agribusiness. IFC finalized a study of value chains to identify new business development
opportunities and continue to support SMEs. The value chains evaluated were cashew, cotton, rice,
maize, cassava, livestock/milk, poultry/eggs, pineapple, horticulture, soya, fishery, and shea butter. About
two value chains will be selected for TA and financing. This work ties in well with the tourism-related RSF.

4.       During the FY13–17 CPS periods, MIGA continued to support Benin in three projects, in
tourism/business services (Malian Hotel Promotion Company -– Societe Malienne de Promotion Hoteliere
S.A. - US$ 1.0 million); in infrastructure (IT Company Services - Spacetel Benin S.A.R.L. - US$1.0 million);
and Bureau Veritas, Single Widow Initiative: Societe d’Exploitation du Guichet Unique du Benin - US5.4
million), for a total of US$7.4 million gross exposure. During the course of the CPS, the Spacetel Benin
S.A.R.L. guarantee expired on September 29, 2016. The contract with Société Malienne de Promotion
Hoteliere S.A. was cancelled on July 30, 2016, as the investor became comfortable with the risk and no
longer required the cover. At the end of the CPS period, MIGA’s operation with Bureau Veritas Inspection,
Valuation, Assessment and Control continued in effect (see Annex 2d - MIGA’s Outstanding Exposure
table). MIGA continues to explore opportunities to stimulate private investment as part of the World Bank
Group, by promoting foreign investment into Benin through the provision of guarantees against political
risks (that is, the risks of transfer restriction and inconvertibility, breach of contract, expropriation, and
war and civil disturbance).

While there have been no new projects since the start of the CPS period, MIGA remains eager to support
projects through its political risk insurance product line. MIGA and IFC continue to seek ways of increasing
their engagement in Benin, though identifying project sponsors with the required standards and
investments of the appropriate scale has been a challenge.




                                                     87
                 CLR Annex 2d - MIGA’s Outstanding Guarantee Exposure in Benin

 Effective   Expiration       Investor Name        Investor   Business                       Maximum
                                                                           Project Name
   Date        Date         (Guarantee Holder)     Country     Sector                         (US$)
                          Bureau Veritas
                          Inspection, Valuation,
07/22/2011   07/21/2021                            France     Services   Guichet Unique      6,048,158
                          Assessment, and
                          Control
                                                                                    Total:   6,048,158




                                                   88
89
