.
BENIN
Progress Assessment
Global Fund Breaking
Down Barriers Initiative
December 2023
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 2 of 49
Table of Contents
1. Exective Summary 5
2. Overview 7
2.1 Breaking Down Barriers’ theory of change 7
2.2 Methods 8
2.3 Overview of scorecard results 9
3. Background and Country Context 10
3.1 HIV epidemiological context 10
3.2 Legal and policy context 11
3.3 Financial investment 12
3.4 Funding landscape 13
3.5 National ownership and the enabling environment 13
4. Impact of Programs to Remove Rights-Related
Barriers on Health Services and the Enabling Environment
15
4.1 Providing integrated, non-stigmatizing services to key and
vulnerable populations 15
4.2 “Looking in – Looking out” (LILO) anti-stigma training. 16
5. Towards Comprehensiveness: Achievements and
Gaps in Scope, Scale and Quality 18
5.1 Implementation status of programs to reduce human rights-related
barriers to services 19
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 3 of 49
5.2 Implementation status of program essentials 36
5.3 Cross-cutting observations 38
Key Recommendations 40
Annex 1: Scorecard Methodology 44
Annex 2: Key Informants, Site Visits, Beneficiary
Interviews and Validation Meeting Participants 46
Annex 3: Documents reviewed 48
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 4 of 49
DISCLAIMER
Towards the operationalization of the Global Fund Strategy 2023-2028, this progress
assessment was commissioned by the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria
and presents the findings of the independent research team that carried out the
assessment. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect the views of the Global
Fund.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The progress assessment of Breaking Down Barriers was led by a team of researchers
assembled by the Drexel University Dornsife School of Public Health.
The Benin Progress Assessment was conducted under a grant to Drexel University.
The research team was comprised of Diederik Lohman, MA, MPH, independent health
and human rights consultant, Joe Amon PhD, MSPH of Drexel University, and
Médessè Bruno DOUSSOH, independent consultant.
The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the Global Fund, as well as the
many country stakeholders, technical partners and the many others who provided
reports, insight and myriad contributions, and who demonstrated their dedication to
their programs and beneficiaries. 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 5 of 49
1. Exective Summary
Since 2018, Benin has received funding from the Global Fund to remove rights-related
barriers to health services, participating as part of the Breaking Down Barriers cohort.
Breaking Down Barriers provides funding for “comprehensive” programs to remove
rights-related barriers, based upon scaling up a set of internationally recognized
human rights programs. Countries are also supported to create enabling environments
to advance comprehensive responses.
This assessment examines progress on HIV-related barriers since the September
2021 mid-term assessment (MTA). The assessment examined human rights programs
within the country and was conducted between January 2022 and October 2023,
approximately one year and a half since the start of the GC6 grant.1
It finds that despite
a slow start in implementation, Benin has made modest progress in scaling up
programs to remove human rights-related barriers to HIV services. In particular, the
assessment found several positive developments:
• HIV treatment sites provide integrated, non-stigmatizing services to key and
vulnerable populations. The integration of peer mediators, psychologists and
legal service providers (‘Assistants Juristes’) into HIV services has been
expanded and led to integrated, holistic and supportive HIV services for Key
and Vulnerable populations.
• Strengthened legal literacy, redress and assistance programs: The number of
Assistants Juristes has increased from 6 to 17, covering a total of more than 50
healthcare sites. The Assistants Juristes routinely sensitize patients at these
sites on their human rights and redress options, and have started conducting
some legal literacy sessions at community level.
• “Looking in – Looking out” (LILO) anti-stigma trainings conducted to train
trainers, including representatives from key and vulnerable groups, have
demonstrated impact on civil society and government participants. Trainers are
now training various target populations.
• Plan International Benin has opened Benin’s first methadone clinic with
integrated, holistic medical and psycho-social care combined with peer
outreach. While not technically part of the Breaking Down Barriers initiative, the
clinic, which is just starting operations, has strong potential for removing human
rights-related barriers to HIV services for people who use drugs. The
government supports provision of Opioid Substitution Therapy services for
injecting drug users.
Nevertheless, significant challenges remain as Benin continues building a
comprehensive response to removing rights-related barriers. These include:
1 The Benin GC6 grant began in the first quarter of 2021 for the HIV grant and on July 1st, 2022 for the RSSH
grant.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 6 of 49
• Significant delays in implementation of many human rights activities.
• Decreasing, but still significant, community stigma and discrimination against
PLHV, KPs, and high rates of GBV as well as reported self-stigma.
• Limited capacity for mediation of human rights violations and significant barriers
to accessing the Benin justice system for survivors of GBV - including high cost
for medical certificates and pressure from family for non-judicial resolution.
• Police targeting and abuse of key populations including the criminalization of
drug use/possession and slum clearance/raids targeting PWUD and high rates
of abuses reported by sex workers.
• Need to strengthen capacity of KP/VP CSOs to manage activities and funds
directly, and more resources are needed for the engagement of peer educators
in community activities and in training to be able to work as legal services
providers and peer paralegals.
• Monitoring and evaluation is uneven and KP/VP CSO need support in
documenting cases which could serve as the basis for advocacy related to the
impact of rights violations as a barrier to access to health care.
The goal of the assessment is to help identify priorities for the next phase of
programming where Benin in GC7 is receiving €603,900 in human rights matching
funds. Benin’s funding request was prepared before this assessment could be
conducted; some recommendations will therefore need to be implemented through
reprogramming of funds during the grant implementation period. 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 7 of 49
2. Overview
Since 2017, the Global Fund has provided more than US$85 million in Matching Funds
to scale up evidence‐based programming to reduce human rights‐related barriers to
HIV, TB and malaria services through Breaking Down Barriers, catalyzing countries to
commit additional financial support from within their allocations. To track progress in
each of the 20 countries, the Global Fund has commissioned baseline and mid-term
assessments in 2017 and 2019, respectively. In 2022, it commissioned a second
progress assessment to examine further progress and inform further investments in
this area, a continuing objective of the Global Fund’s Strategy for 2023‐2028.
Breaking Down Barriers aims to support countries to have “comprehensive” programs
to remove rights-related barriers. “Comprehensive” programs are those that: (a)
comprise a set of activities that are internationally recognized as effective in reducing
human rights-related barriers to health (see Text Box 1); (b) are accessible or serve
the majority of the estimated numbers of key and vulnerable populations affected by
such barriers; and (c) are adequately resourced to move from non-existence or oneoff/small-scale activities to a level of implementation likely to significantly reduce
human rights-related barriers to services (a sustained, mutually-reinforcing, broadly
protective package at scale). In Benin, funding is provided to address only HIV-related
barriers.
Text Box 1: Programs to Remove Human Rights-related Barriers to HIV Services
• Eliminating stigma and discrimination in all settings
• Ensuring non-discriminatory provision of health care
• Ensuring rights-based law enforcement practices
• Legal literacy (“know your rights”)
• Increasing access to justice
• Improving laws, regulations and polices relating to HIV and HIV/TB
• Reducing gender discrimination, harmful gender norms and violence against
women and girls in all their diversity
• Community mobilization and advocacy for human rights
2.1 Breaking Down Barriers’ theory of change
The theory of change for the Breaking Down Barriers initiative is based on evidence
from the HIV and TB epidemics that human rights-related barriers to health services2
increase vulnerability to infection and negatively affect access to, uptake of and
retention in HIV and TB services, particularly for certain key and vulnerable
populations. To effectively reduce these barriers, countries should implement – at
appropriate scale and with high quality – a set of internationally-recognized, evidencebased, human rights and gender-related interventions (see Text Box 1). This will in
2 The Benin Progress Assessment focuses only on HIV.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 8 of 49
turn accelerate country progress towards national, regional and global HIV and TB
targets. Efforts to remove rights-related barriers will also protect and enhance Global
Fund investments and will strengthen health and community systems.
The purpose of the assessment is to assess the impact of the human rights
interventions on uptake, access, and retention of HIV services, with attention to the
quality, scale-up and sustainability of programmatic implementation. It also aims to
capture lessons learned related to human rights program implementation.
Specifically, the Benin Progress Assessment focused on the following three priority
areas:
• Assess programmatic progress and impact on services since January 2022;
• Assess the current national HIV policy landscape and its impact on programs
to reduce human rights-related barriers to access to health services; and
• Inform the GC7 funding process.
2.2 Methods
This Benin Progress Assessment addresses HIV-related human rights programs and
activities, supported by Global Fund and other donors during the period October 2021
through October 2023.
Benin is categorized as a “focused assessment” country in the overall 20 country
Progress Assessment. While the methods used are the same between focused and
in-depth assessments – i.e., they all included document review, key informant
interviews and case study analysis, focused assessments include a smaller number
of interviews with implementors, stakeholders and beneficiaries than in-depth
evaluations.
The assessment began with a desk review of relevant documents from the Global
Fund and other key stakeholders, including government policies, strategic plans and
guidelines (see Annex 3). Interviews were conducted in Cotonou, Bohicon, and PortoNovo in October 2023. Overall, the research team interviewed more than 65 key
implementers, government agencies, technical partners and beneficiaries.
Stakeholder validation of key findings and recommendations was conducted in
October and November 2023 with the goal of helping stakeholders with measurement
of Global Fund Key Performance Indicator E1 for GC7. Where the team found
differences in views on the degree of progress, types of barriers, or other issues, we
have tried to reflect that difference in the report. Pseudonyms are used for beneficiary
interviewees to protect confidentiality and privacy.
Table 1: Benin Progress Assessment Timeline
Assessment Component Dates
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 9 of 49
Desk review of available program reports, epidemiological
information, and other background documents
September 2023
Key informant interviews October 2023
Follow-up with relevant key informants October-November 2023
Presentation of key report findings to Global Fund November 2023
2.3 Overview of scorecard results
As part of Breaking Down Barriers, progress in countries is assessed on a 0-5 scale,
with 0 demonstrating no programs present and 5 indicating that programs are
operating at scale (national level), covering over 90% of the target populations. Please
see key below (and Annex 1) for full scale.
Key
0 – no programs present
1 – one-off activities
2 – small scale
3 – operating at subnational level
4 – operating at national level (>50% of geographic coverage)
5 – at scale at national level (>90% geographic coverage + >90% population
coverage)
Since mid-term, scores for programs to remove human rights-related barriers to HIV
have mostly been positive, with the greatest increase noted for ensuring nondiscriminatory provision of health care. Five other program areas (eliminate stigma
and discrimination in all settings, ensure rights-based law enforcement practices, legal
literacy, improve access to justice, and reduce HIV-related gender discrimination)
increased slightly. One program area - monitoring and reforming laws and policies -
saw no change. While there is still a significant way to go in achieving
comprehensiveness in all program areas, with the support of Plan Benin as the lead
implementer of human rights activities there is increased activity and momentum
towards achieving greater scale-up of rights-based programs.
Program Area Baseline
(2018)
MTA
(2021)
Progress
(2023)
Eliminate stigma and discrimination in all
settings 0.8 1.5 2.0
Ensure non‐discriminatory provision of health
care
0.5 2.0 3.5
Ensure rights-based law enforcement practices 0.5 1.5 2.0
Improve legal literacy ("know your rights") 0.5 3.0 3.5
Improve access to justice (HIV-related legal
services) 0.8 3.0 3.8
Improve laws, regulations and policies related
to HIV and HIV/TB 0 0.5 0.5
Reducing HIV-related gender discrimination 1.5 1.5 2.0
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 10 of 49
Community mobilization and advocacy for
HIV/TB * * 2.0
Average Score 0.7 1.9 2.5
#
#
: Note that the average scores only consider the first seven indicators to ensure consistency with the baseline and MTA.
3. Background and Country Context
3.1 HIV epidemiological context
Benin has a mixed HIV epidemic with prevalence among adults in the general
population estimated at 0.8% in 20223 and considerably higher among key
populations: 21.9% among transgender people; 7.2% among sex workers; 8.3%
among men who have sex with men (MSM); and 2.1% among people who inject drugs.
Among prisoners, HIV prevalence was estimated at 1.2%.4
In 2022, an estimated
1,500 adults and children (range from 1,000-2,300) in Benin were newly infected with
HIV. Of new infections among adults and children >15 years, two-thirds were
estimated to occur among women and girls.5 An estimated 1,900 people died of HIVrelated causes.6
Progress towards the 95-95-95 target indicators in 2022 compared to 2020 found
overall improvements: The percentage of those living with HIV who knew their status
increased from 73% to 85%; the percentage of those who know their status and who
were on ART increased from 92% to 96%; and the percentage of those on ART who
were virally suppressed increased from 81% to 82%.
7 Compared to the West and
Central African region as a whole, Benin’s performance in 2022 on the first two of
these 95-95-95 indicators is similar (85% vs 82% for the first and 96% vs 96% for the
second). However, for the third, Benin reported a lower rate than the region (82% vs
90%). As the range overlaps for all of these indicators, however it is possible that these
differences are misleading, or that there are specific barriers to retention in HIV care
and consistent ART that make viral suppression difficult (Table).
Percent of People Living with HIV who Know their HIV Status
2020 2021 2022
Benin 73 [61 - 85] 78 [65 - 91] 85 [71 - 98]
3 UNAIDS. (2022). Benin Country Factsheet. https://www.unaids.org/en/regionscountries/countries/benin
4
Ibid.
5
Ibid.
6
Ibid.
7 UNAIDS (2024). AIDSinfo (website). Available at: https://aidsinfo.unaids.org/ . UNAIDS. (2020). UNAIDS DATA 2020,
2nd edition. https://www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/media_asset/2020_aids-data-book_en.pdf
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 11 of 49
West & Central Africa 68 [60 - 79] 75 [66 - 87] 82 [72 - 94]
Percent of those who Know their HIV Status on ART
2020 2021 2022
Benin 92 [77 - 98] 96 [80 - 98] 96 [80 - 98]
West & Central Africa 92 [81 - 98] 95 [83 - 98] 96 [84 - 98]
Percent of those on ART who are Virally Suppressed
2020 2021 2022
Benin 81 [68 - 95] 79 [66 - 93] 82 [68 - 97]
West & Central Africa 83 [73 - 96] 89 [78 - 98] 90 [79 - 98]
3.2 Legal and policy context
Benin’s constitution provides for a right to equal access to health services and nondiscrimination. The country’s 2005 HIV law, which was still in the process of being
amended as of December 2023, likewise prohibits discrimination against people living
with HIV or other sexually transmitted disease. The law, however, may allow for
unauthorized disclosure of a person’s HIV status and criminalizes HIV transmission in
certain cases. According to the baseline report, enforcement of the law’s protective
provisions for people living with HIV is weak.8 Sexual relations between people of the
same sex are not criminalized in Benin although the baseline report notes that
homosexuality remains “incredibly stigmatized.”9 Possession and use of drugs
remains a criminal offense criminalized, and sex workers face frequent police
harassment, even though sex work is not.. The National Strategic Plan for HIV
provides the framework for the country’s HIV response.
Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on HIV Responses
Unlike other countries in the region, Benin never imposed a national lockdown to prevent
the spread of COVID-19. Instead, after the first cases were identified in the country, the
government-imposed cordons sanitaires in twelve—and subsequently fifteen—towns
affected by COVID, prohibiting travel between those towns and the rest of the country.10
The cordon sanitaire was lifted on May 11, 2020. As of July 2023, Benin reported 28,014
confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 163 deaths. As of December 2022, a total of 4,232,541
vaccine doses have been administered. While the COVID-19 pandemic initially slowed the
8 The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (2018), Baseline Assessment: Benin
9
Ibid.
10 Issideen Ayinla Osseni, Benin responds to covid-19: sanitary cordon without generalized containment or
lockdown?, Trop Med Health 2020, available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7293962/
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 12 of 49
implementation of programs, the overall impact on BDB initiative-funded activities during
the current review period was limited.
3.3 Financial investment
In 2018, Benin received EUR 1.2 million in catalytic funding from the Global Fund for
programs to remove human rights-related barriers for the period 2018-2020. It
received an exemption from the 1:1 matching requirement in order to allow sufficient
funding for essential prevention and treatment services. Under GC6, Benin requested
EUR 1,087 million in catalytic matching funds to remove human rights barriers related
to HIV, and matched it with EUR 609,577.60 from its main allocation for the grant
period 2021-2023. These funds were included in two grants: The RSSH grant, for
which SPRS (the health system strengthening arm of the Ministry of Health) was the
PR, contained the catalytic funds and the HIV grants, with Plan Benin as PR, contained
the match from the general HIV allocation. These funds were distributed across the
key program areas the Global Fund has identified as essential to removing human
rights-related barriers to HIV services.
Table 2 shows how the matching funds were distributed across these areas in GC6.
Stigma and discrimination reduction interventions received the largest share of funds,
followed by legal literacy programs and programs to sensitize lawmakers and lawenforcement agents. Smaller amounts went to training of health workers, legal
services, and interventions to reduce gender discrimination. The program area for
improving the legal and normative context did not receive any funding under this
grant.11 The RSSH grant does not allow for a similar breakdown of the catalytic funds
as it did not use the human rights module to categorize interventions. However, this
grant included interventions in these same areas, with a significant focus on stigma
and discrimination reduction and on legal literacy and access to legal services.
Table 2: Catalytic matching funds for HIV human rights interventions in the
Plan International Benin HIV grant, GC6 (2021-2023)
Intervention Amount (Euro)
Stigma and discrimination reduction (HIV/TB) 253,657.16
Human rights and medical ethics related to HIV and HIV/TB for
health care providers
33,255.23
Sensitization of lawmakers and law-enforcement agents 73,495.67
Legal literacy 92,803.34
HIV and HIV/TB related legal services 18,141.43
Improving laws, regulations and policies related to HIV and HIV/TB 0
Reducing HIV-related gender discrimination, harmful gender
norms and violence against women
25,843.16
11 Note that these budget figures are from approved grants in 2020. Actual expenditures may look different than
the initial budgets. The specifics of budget tracking and costing are beyond the scope of the progress
assessment, but budgets are provided to demonstrate the areas of investment from the Global Fund in GC6.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 13 of 49
Community mobilization and advocacy (HIV/TB) 112,381.60
Total 609,577.60
The total amount represented approximately 2.2% of the total HIV and RSSH grant
budget of EUR 78,732,541 and included two Principal Recipients: the Ministry of
Health (through PSLS/SRPS) and Plan International Benin in GC6.12 In GC7, Benin is
eligible for €603,900 in human rights matching funds for HIV.
3.4 Funding landscape
In Benin, the Global Fund is the primary funder for programs to remove rights-related
to access HIV services. The US government, primarily through USAID, does support
some related projects, through the Ending AIDS in West Africa (EAWA) program,
managed by FHI360. The program primarily focuses on HIV testing, treatment and
care services. While initially focusing on key populations, the success of the program,
according to FHI360’s webpage, led it to expand its work to the general population.
USAID funding through PEPFAR in Benin started in December 2021 with an annual
investment of $6 million, and a focus on 18 “priority intervention sites” including clinics
and laboratories in four high burden departments, Atlantique, Littoral, Couffo, and
Mono, with the goal of ensuring continuity of treatment and viral load (VL) suppression
and providing HIV prevention services and interventions against stigma and
discrimination. In December 2022, the US Ambassador Brian Shukan acknowledged
the importance of addressing human rights barriers, saying that: “Marginalization,
human rights violations, and discrimination are some of the barriers to accessing HIV
care services.” The Netherlands funded a multi-year program supporting LGBT
organizations.
3.5 National ownership and the enabling environment
As part of the matching fund requirements for Breaking Down Barriers, all countries
are required to develop national plans for removing rights-related barriers to HIV and
TB services, as well as establish or designate a body to coordinate the plan.
In 2020, Benin developed a five-year 63-page human rights plan aligned with Benin’s
national HIV, TB, malaria and hepatitis strategy (PSNIE 2019-2023). The plan outlined
broad interventions; specific activities; location and/or coverage; expected results;
indicators; timeline; responsibility; cost; and potential sources of funding. The plan
called for national coverage in all districts for the bulk of the interventions. The
proposed activities were organized according to UNAIDS’ key program areas for
removing human rights-related barriers to HIV, however interventions to influence
laws, policies and practices were little emphasized. A significant number of activities
from the plan were included in the RSSH and HIV grants under the GC6 funding cycle
12 Where amounts were reported in US dollars in source materials, the average dollar-euro exchange rate for
2023 (0.9241) was used to convert the amounts to euros.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 14 of 49
of the Global Fund; while some other donors support HIV-related human rights
programs the plan was not specifically used for fund raising purposes. However
implementation of human rights activities under the RSSH grant were stalled until
responsibility for implementation of these activities was transferred to Plan Benin in
early 2023.
The five-year plan was developed by a human rights working group with
representation from government, civil society and technical partners. This working
group, however, has not met over the assessment period. There is thus no standing
body that oversees the implementation of the five-year plan or the human rights
programs funded through the GC6 grant. In November 2022, a consultation with a
broad array of stakeholders was held to reprogram human rights activities under the
RSSH grant but it has not met since.
The government has been supportive of efforts to reduce human rights-related barriers
to HIV services engagement but it has not been proactive in program implementation.
Although the health systems strengthening department of the Ministry of Health is the
principal recipient of the RSSH grant, implementation of the human rights programs in
that grant faced long delays and was, ultimately, transferred to Plan Benin. Civil
society, including community organizations, is well represented on the CCM, providing
an opportunity for engagement and advocacy with government stakeholders.
Key Recommendations for HIV Program Governance and Implementation
• The human rights working group should be reactivated or reconstituted,
perhaps as a sub-group of the HIV working group, and meet regularly to discuss
and coordinate ongoing implementation of the five-year plan and of programs
to remove human rights-related barriers to HIV services. Resources should be
reprogrammed to support these meetings.
• The human rights working group should be tasked with reviewing the five-year
plan, which currently ends December 31, 2024, to decide whether to extend
and/or update it, or develop a new plan.
• Government agencies should closely engage with civil society organizations on
the implementation of the five-year plan. Government agencies should, in
particular, commit to advancing the institutionalization of training on stigma and
discrimination into pre- and in-service curricula for health workers, police and
justice officials.
• Global Fund should provide technical support for implementation of human
rights programs, including to support the PR and human rights SR, as
necessary
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 15 of 49
4. Impact of Programs to Remove Rights-Related
Barriers on Health Services and the Enabling
Environment
The impact of the Breaking Down Barriers initiative in Benin was measured through
an assessment of the scale-up of comprehensive human rights programs, through an
evaluation of progress in establishing an enabling environment for rights-based HIV
responses, and through in-depth case studies of the impact of specific interventions
drawn from interviews with more than 65 key implementers, government agencies,
technical partners and beneficiaries. More information on the specific progress in each
area is in the section on scale up of programs (“Towards Comprehensiveness”) below.
4.1 Providing integrated, non-stigmatizing services to key and
vulnerable populations
Plan Benin, the lead implementer for Global Fund human rights investments described
the integration of legal service providers, peer mediators, psychologists, and clinical
health care providers as critical to achieving impact with key and vulnerable
populations. Plan’s staff said that with an integrated, holistic and supportive strategy
for key and vulnerable populations, as well as survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence, they were able to see increased access to HIV services and retention in care.
In interviews in two cities in Benin, Bohicon and Porto Novo, hospital staff spoke about
the importance of holistically addressing the needs of key and vulnerable populations
using peer educators and mediators for pre- and post-test counseling and linkage to
care. Hospital staff also spoke about the importance of these personnel in identifying
individuals “lost to follow-up” and finding strategies to re-engage them in care.
Assistants Juristes and psychologists were also incorporated into the program to
address human rights-related barriers that they faced as well as barriers related to
transportation, nutrition, and other health concerns, such as malaria.
At the health clinic “Racines”, clinical staff said that the integration of attention to rights
barriers made distinct progress in their clinical work and in their “visibility” in the
community:
“We used to do activities without talking about it. But now, we are much more
open and we see that our work with patients makes them more open and
more accepting of themselves. We have also found it much easier to work
with Ministries. It’s a circle – we find ways to help people break down the
stigma and discrimination they face and that in turn makes it easier for the
next person to come get tested, get linked to care and stay in treatment.”
With support from Plan Canada, Plan Benin also developed a guide and training for
health workers and HIV test peer counselors on legal issues and stigma and 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 16 of 49
discrimination and conducted advocacy to address issues of stigma and discrimination
with the police and judicial officials, journalists, health workers, religious leaders, and
key population representatives (including LILO training as described below).
Another example of integrated services for key populations is the development by the
Ministry of Health of a medical clinic (CPIAC) for people who use drugs which provides
HIV testing and treatment for drug dependency. The clinic, supported by the UN Office
on Drugs and Crime and Plan Benin, includes peer educators (in partnership with the
CSO Borne), psychologists, social workers, pharmacists, physicians, nurses, and
addiction treatment specialists. The clinic plans to also provide women who use drugs
with reproductive and sexual health care, and treatment for gender-based violence,
although these services are not yet operational. At the time of the field visit, methadone
was not yet available but enrollment in a pilot program was underway and negotiation
with police was ongoing.
4.2 “Looking in – Looking out” (LILO) anti-stigma training.
The LILO (Look In, Look Out) program was initially developed by the International
HIV/AIDS Alliance (now known as Frontline AIDS) as a tool to combat selfstigmatization among people living with HIV. Subsequently, the methodology was
adapted to address stigma related to key population groups, including LGBT+ people,
sex workers and drug users, and to focus on values, engaging other stakeholders,
such as healthcare providers, police and religious leaders. The uniqueness of the
"LILO" approach lies in the notion that personal and social transformation begins with
the self. It's not about "training" or "awareness-raising" in the conventional sense.
These workshops lead professionals from organizations and institutions - who need to
engage effectively with key populations (KPs), but who have reservations about them,
lack information or are reluctant to do this work (for cultural, religious or other reasons)
- to confront and overcome their own prejudices and question their attitudes towards
these populations.
Starting in 2023, Benin has conducted around 30 trainings for various audiences:
health professionals, law enforcement, social workers, key populations, NGOs,
government representatives, and religious and community leaders. The LILO
approach has been widely cited by stakeholders, including communities, as a gamechanging approach to the perception and attitudes of health providers and law
enforcement agents taking the training, as well as an empowering experience for
members of key populations participating, increasing their self-esteem and providing
a network for key populations among legal service providers, police, religious leaders
and others who are often inaccessible or who were previously unresponsive to key
population communities and concerns. These connections help these populations to
break out of their isolation and develops important allies in the defense of their rights.
In our interviews, participants in the LILO training used glowing terms such as
“transformative” to describe the changes they felt in terms of their self-perception and
in terms of the relationships it built among participants. Participants universally 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 17 of 49
recommended that the program be expanded and that efforts be made to support
follow-up to foster long-term ties between group participants.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 18 of 49
5. Towards Comprehensiveness: Achievements
and Gaps in Scope, Scale and Quality
This section examines progress towards a comprehensive response to programs to
remove rights-related barriers for HIV in Benin. It provides an in-depth analysis of each
HIV program area, then moves on to a discussion of Benin’s progress in achieving the
human rights-related HIV program essentials.
Benchmarks on assessing progress within program areas
The program areas below compare the status of programming in Q4 2023 with the results
of the Mid-term assessment. To assess progress, the following terms are used:
• No progress: no activities identified for the program areas and no plans identified for
future activities
• Delayed progress: activities on-going, but mostly in planning stages
• Some progress: small-scale or pilots of specific activities
• Progress: activities in the process of being implemented beyond pilot or small-scale
phases
• Significant progress: activities systematically implemented; advancing towards scale
up of geographic coverage
Comparing the Mid-Term Assessment results to the 2018 baseline, researchers found
that Benin had scaled-up activities in six of seven program areas, with activities in
three areas evolving from one-off, time-limited programs to operating at subnational
level in multiple regions. Efforts to train health workers and legal assistance programs
were particularly well developed, while programs to reduce gender-based
discrimination, which were the most developed at baseline, had stagnated. Human
rights programs targeting transgender populations had improved significantly.
Despite this progress, the Mid-Term Assessment noted that Benin had only made
limited progress toward institutionalizing interventions to remove human rights-related
barriers and their integration with service delivery programs, negatively affecting the
quality, impact, reach and, especially, sustainability of programs. The report
recommended greater efforts to ensure these activities become a standard component
of the HIV response. In addition, the report noted an urgent need to strengthen
monitoring and evaluation of all human rights programs.
Overall, the current assessment found that since Mid-Term Assessment, scores for
programs to remove human rights-related barriers to HIV have mostly increased, with
the greatest increase noted for ensuring non-discriminatory provision of health care.
Five other program areas (eliminate stigma and discrimination in all settings, ensure
rights-based law enforcement practices, legal literacy, improve access to justice, and
reduce HIV-related gender discrimination) increased slightly. One program area -
monitoring and reforming laws and policies - saw no change. While there is still a
significant way to go in achieving comprehensiveness in all program areas, with the 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 19 of 49
support of Plan Benin as the lead implementer of human rights activities there is
increased activity and momentum towards achieving greater scale-up of human rights
programs.
5.1 Implementation status of programs to reduce human rightsrelated barriers to services
(a) Eliminate stigma and discrimination in all settings
HIV program area
Score13
Baseline
(2018)
Mid-Term
(2021)
Progress (2023)
Eliminate stigma and
discrimination in all settings 0.8 1.5 2.0
In its assessment of stigma and discrimination interventions in the Mid-Term
Assessment, researchers noted that Benin had, since the baseline assessment,
strengthened its engagement of peer educators in activities to reduce self-stigma and
improve legal literacy among key and vulnerable populations including its focus on
transgender populations. At the same time the assessment noted that activities were
still limited in scope: Community mobilization activities, public engagement with
opinion leaders on HIV, and efforts to address stigma and discrimination in educational
and employment settings were reported to be non-existent. The Mid-Term
Assessment report also noted that Benin had not conducted a stigma index study
since 2016.
Recommendations in the mid-term for addressing stigma and discrimination included
for implementors to take a more holistic approach to fighting stigma and discrimination
that engages societal stigma in its different forms and settings, including communities,
educational institutions, and the workplace. Additional recommendations included to
carry out a stigma index survey, and to increase funding for stigma and discrimination
interventions.
Key informants told the Progress Assessment team that levels of stigma are
decreasing, especially in health services, but that stigma and discrimination against
PLHV and KPs in communities remains a significant challenge, as does self-stigma.
The 2021 Stigma Index reported significant improvements in several key areas
compared to the 2016 Stigma Index study. For example, experiences of stigma and
discrimination within the family had dropped dramatically, from more than 50% of study
participants reporting incidents of stigma in 2016 to fewer than 5% for most categories
in 2021. The study also found significant, although less dramatic, reductions in
behavior related self-stigma although, counterintuitively, self-stigmatizing views had
increased. For example, where in 2016, 18.8% of participants said that they had not
participated in social events in the previous twelve months because of their HIV status,
13 See Annex 1 for the interpretation of the scores.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 20 of 49
in 2021 that was the case for 11.8% but many more participants felt “dirty” or guilty
because of their HIV status.14 The study also found that fewer participants disclosed
their HIV status to their partners, from 61.9% in 2016 to 36.5% in 2021.
During the assessment period, Benin has implemented several key interventions to
address societal bias and stigma. After initial delays, the implementation of LILO (see
case study 2) started in 2023. By December 2023, 34 LILO trainings had taken place,
including training of 24 trainers, among whom many of the stakeholders interviewed
for this assessment had participated. Trainings for various populations, including
police (around 90 officers), health care providers (around 90), and faith leaders
(around 90), were carried out by the end of the year. LILO trainings were widely
praised both for their impact on those individuals participating in the training and for
transforming the discussion towards values and shared beliefs. Participants from key
and vulnerable populations noted that the training had significantly shifted their
perceptions of themselves and of other key vulnerable populations.
Benin also expanded the integration of peer educators, mediators, psychologists and
Assistants Juristes at HIV service sites, adding 11 new Assistants Juristes and
expanding HIV service site coverage from 23 to 49. This holistic approach was praised
as having helped reduce stigma and discrimination in health settings (see also next
program area) but also providing a vehicle for addressing community stigma. For
example, in several health settings visited by the Assessment team, Assistants
Juristes spoke about their efforts to support disclosure of HIV status and to mediate
within families when conflict erupted around a positive diagnosis. Similarly, peer
educators provided support to individuals seeking HIV testing or experiencing
challenges to getting access or staying on treatment, including referring individuals for
legal support, psychosocial or pastoral counseling, as well as helping individuals with
broader health and legal concerns, including child custody issues. In group interviews,
key and vulnerable population members spoke about how this support led to greater
acceptance in their family or community. Finally, some members of the LGBT
community said that police trainings, organized by Plan Benin, had been helpful for
reducing stigma towards LGBT populations, and that it had made it easier for them to
report abuses.
Despite this reported progress, ongoing harassment and abuse by police and stigma
from community was reported by sex workers and PWUD. MSM and transgender
individuals also reported experiencing severe community stigma. Compared to the
resources provided to address stigma and discrimination in health care settings (see
below), relatively few programs specifically focused on reducing HIV-related stigma in
the community and self-stigma continued to be identified as a significant barrier to
accessing HIV services. The issue of self-stigma is also being addressed in the
PEPFAR-funded FHI/EAWA Project, but it was noted by some program staff that little
coordination or sharing of lessons occurred between programs. Both PLWH and
14 Rapport de L’Enquete Index de la Stigmatisation (INDEX STIGMA) 2.0 des Personnes Vivant avec le VIH au
Benin (2021). https://www.stigmaindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/Benin-SI-2.0-Report-2021_French.pdf
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 21 of 49
health workers interviewed mentioned the reluctance among many people living with
HIV simply coming to the hospital for fear of being seen by neighbors or relatives and
identified as seeking HIV services.
BESYP, a network of LGBT organizations, also identified community and self-stigma
and discrimination as an ongoing concern. To address it, BESYP emphasized the
importance of both education – through peer educators, psychologists, Assistants
Juristes – and through documentation of abuses in their Human Rights Observatory.
BESYP described work with magistrates and conducting “know your rights” campaigns
with community members, partly with Global Fund support and with support from the
government of Ireland. BESYP also conducts “accompaniment” with LGBTI individuals
testing positive for HIV to support their linkage to treatment.
A peer educator from BESYP, reflecting on progress since the Mid-Term Assessment,
said:
“There’s been a real change in the last few years. But we’re not there yet.
People feel more free to speak out about who they are. But not everywhere.”
A woman working as a peer educator with REBAP+ (Benin Network of Associations
of People Living with HIV (REBAP+)) echoed the sentiment that stigma had decreased
but that there were still significant challenges.
“When I tested positive I didn’t know what to do. REBAP+ gave me life and
hope. There’s less stigma on the radio and TV, but in your family, it’s hard –
there’s suspicion of prostitution, of sleeping around. With treatment, being
healthy, that can help reduce stigma but being in a sero-discordant relationship
brings suspicion, confusion, and fear.”
Key informants also spoke of the need to engage religious leaders more – both to
speak to their constituencies about accepting people living with HIV and because they
are often turned to first by couples after one tests positive for HIV. At the same time,
religious leaders were seen as perpetuating stigma at times. In one example provided
to researchers, religious schools tested all staff for HIV without consent and in another
case pastors divulged the HIV status of parishioners to family members.
Although broad anti-stigma and discrimination legislation appears to be out of reach
in Benin for now due to a lack of government support and lack of capacity among
CSOs to develop and implement a strategy for legislative advocacy, expanding the
number of key and vulnerable population peer educators and peer paralegals with a
community (rather than health clinic) focus would support the broader goal of reducing
and eliminating community stigma and discrimination. In addition, trained peer
educators and peer paralegals could support broader documentation/CLM of rights
abuses, which currently has little support.
Recommendations
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 22 of 49
• Expand LILO trainings, ensuring that members of key and vulnerable
populations participate in all of them and develop relationships with other
participants.
• Expand number of Assistants Juristes working with health centers and with Key
Population CSOs to allow for greater engagement in the community (as
opposed to only at health centers)
• Introduce peer paralegals among peer educators to work in communities with
their peers to improve legal literacy, intervene in cases of stigma, discrimination
and GBV at community level, link clients to legal services, and reduce selfstigma.
• Support stronger CSO documentation of rights abuses in the populations they
serve and build capacity to use documented findings to advocate for structural
changes.
(b) Ensuring non-discriminatory provision of health care
HIV program area
Score
Baseline
(2018)
Mid-Term
(2021)
Progress
(2023)
Ensure non‐discriminatory provision of
health care 0.5 2.0 3.5
The Mid-Term Assessment noted some small-scale activities related to ensuring nondiscriminatory treatment in health care, which was an improvement over the baseline
report. For example, Plan Benin and the Association Béninoise de droit du
Développement/Benin Association for Law and Development (ABDD) had started
conducting training sessions for healthcare providers, with Plan Benin training 200
healthcare workers, social assistants, and treatment literacy workers at sites that
frequently attend to key and vulnerable populations, and ABDD conducting five
sensitization sessions per month through Assistants Juristes with healthcare workers
and members of key and vulnerable populations.
Recommendations in this area from the Mid-Term report focused upon expanding and
continuing training and sensitization sessions, and integrating stigma, discrimination,
human rights, gender-based violence and ethics modules into all in-service training for
HIV services. Also recommended was the incorporation of training in pre-service
curricula in nursing and medical schools.
During the current assessment, the assessment team found that this program area
had achieved the most significant increase in quality and scale up. In health centers
visited in Cotonou, Bohicon and Porto-Novo, it found that the integration of Assistants
Juristes, psychologists and mediators alongside clinical teams has helped to create a
more welcoming environment, increasing access to testing and care for key and
vulnerable populations. With the expansion of the Assistants Juristes program, this
integrated model is now operational in all of Benin’s departments (provinces) and
covers most major hospitals that provide HIV services. 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 23 of 49
The important role of Assistants Juristes, mediators and peer educators was
highlighted by both clinical staff in terms of ensuring that patients were supported in
accessing and staying on treatment following a positive HIV test and by individuals
living with HIV who described the benefits of comprehensive care that addressed both
immediate needs as well as psychosocial and family concerns. The Assistants Juristes
also play an important role in raising awareness around stigma, discrimination and
gender-based violence among service providers at the different hospitals and health
centers where they operate.
Reseau SIDA, a network of LGBTI civil society organizations, described community
HIV testing events to complement clinic-based testing. These sessions, which
included psychologists and Assistants Juristes, were also designed to address
gender-based violence. Racines, an HIV organization which started working on HIV
prevention in 2002 and clinical care in 2005, highlighted the needs of key population
youth as a particular challenge for health centers, particularly when they are in conflict
with their families, and the role of Assistants Juristes as critical to ensuring access to
care.
While not a human rights program per se, another notable advance was the
development of a dedicated center for PWUDs to access methadone and broader
health care (including, in the future, maternal health care for female PWUDs). The
center was not yet operational during the field visit but was fully renovated and staffed
with peer educators, social workers, psychologists and clinical staff and will
significantly improve access to quality, non-discriminatory care for this population. This
center is likely to become an important site for implementation of human rights
interventions geared toward people who use drugs, a population that faces significant
stigma, discrimination and abuse from both police and society more broadly.
Several limitations were mentioned by key stakeholders and beneficiaries, including
that there was limited training of health care workers who were not engaged in HIV
care on non-discrimination. At the same time, some key informants said that the
broader attention to stigma and discrimination and greater acceptance of PLWHIV
within health centers was also experienced by MSM who felt that their treatment in
health settings had improved over the last few years. Nonetheless, more training for
health care workers, especially related to health services for transgender individuals
and expanded access to affordable STI services was needed, and recruitment of key
population representatives for roles as mediators and Assistants Juristes—at present
none of the Assistants Juristes come from key or vulnerable populations—was
identified as important to increase acceptance and impact.
It was also clear that despite a new center for PWUDs, scaling up and integration of
services for PWUD will continue to be needed. Stronger reporting mechanisms within
health centers for incidents of discrimination are also needed and can be integrated
into the responsibilities of Assistants Juristes. As mentioned above, both PLWH and
health workers interviewed mentioned the difficulty people face simply coming to the 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 24 of 49
hospital for fear of being seen by neighbors or relatives and identified as seeking HIV
services.
The assessment did not identify any activities that sought to integrate training on
human rights and medical ethics into standard pre-service or in-service training
curricula for healthcare workers.
Recommendations
• Implement strategies to ensure privacy for patients seeking HIV testing and
care in health centers.
• Ensure that training on stigma and discrimination is integrated into health
worker education programs, including pre- and in-service trainings to allow for
KP friendly service provision. This should include material related to people who
use drugs and transgender people.
• Strengthen reporting mechanisms for incidents of discrimination in health
settings.
• Recruit Assistants Juristes among members of key populations whenever
possible.
(c) Ensuring rights-based law enforcement practices
HIV program area
Score
Baseline
(2018)
Mid-Term
(2021)
Progress
(2023)
Ensuring rights-based law enforcement
practices 0.5 1.5 2.0
Few programs focused on the sensitization of law enforcement and law makers were
found during the baseline and Mid-Term assessments. In 2019 and 2020, Plan Benin
organized sensitization meetings with mayors’ offices, law enforcement agents, judges
and prosecutors about key and vulnerable populations, stigma, discrimination and
human rights. In addition, ABDD brought together police officials of different ranks with
peer educators, members of key and vulnerable populations and health workers for
sensitization sessions as well as “proximity” meetings in several regions. Moreover,
police were engaged in the context of a pilot needle exchange program and a study
on methadone maintenance treatment for injecting drug users. No activities focused
on sensitizing law makers however were noted in the Mid-Term Assessment.
Recommendations made in the Mid-Term assessment included scaling up
sensitization activities, meetings between police and key and vulnerable population
representatives, as well as the development of a strategy to engage lawmakers on the
harmful impact of criminalization on public health goals. It was also recommended that
modules on HIV, key populations and human rights should be developed and
integrated into curricula of the police academy and other training institution for law
enforcement officers, prosecutors and judges.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 25 of 49
In the current assessment, some progress was noted in this program area, including
regular engagement with law enforcement related to key populations and LILO training
which included police. The impact of LILO trainings on police interaction with key and
vulnerable populations is not yet known, as these training had only just started at the
time of this assessment but around 90 police officers had gone through LILO trainings
by the end of 2023. Trainings for prosecutors and judges that were implemented under
GC5 continued with 5 workshops held for legal professionals, with a total of around 40
participants. The assessment did not identify any progress toward integrating modules
on HIV, key and vulnerable populations and human rights into pre- and in-service
training curricula for law enforcement officers.
In discussions with various stakeholders, including the sex worker organization
Solidarite, Trans Benin, the harm reduction group Bornes, and the interlocutors at the
methadone clinic CPIAC, police were cited repeatedly as a barrier to ensuring access
to HIV prevention and care. This was especially true for people who use drugs. A peer
educator at the methadone clinic in Cotonou said: “The last 6 months there’s been a
strong police presence, practically every day. There have been 20 “ghettos” cleared.
These are people’s homes and they are just leveled. People who are suspected of
using drugs are held for a couple of days and those who are believed to be selling
drugs get 2-3 months. It’s difficult for peer educators because we can be suspected of
being users or even dealers. Some police will listen to you, most will not. If you have
educational materials with you, it’s easier to argue if you are stopped, but if you are in
the middle of a ghetto you are just assumed to be a drug user. If you object, the police
just say ‘I have to do my job. My job is repression’.”
In an interview, the Police Commissioner of Bohicon, expressed a degree of frustration
with trainings on stigma and discrimination which he did not feel were effective at
changing attitudes or practices. By contrast, he said that what was needed was
leadership by police officers in positions of authority to make it clear that discrimination
was untenable. The Commissioner spoke about one instance where a sex worker was
turned away by a desk officer from filing a complaint related to theft and sexual
violence, saying:
“The most important thing is the first interaction with police – the desk officer. If
the desk officer is judging people and not listening to what the complaint is they
shouldn’t be on the desk, and when I see that, or hear about that, I have no
problem bumping them back down to patrol. Address the crime not the person.
Everything begins with that first interaction.”
A more positive, but fragile, view of progress on ensuring rights-based law
enforcement that was identified by many different stakeholders was the development
of personal relationships with individual officers, developed via LILO trainings or
through engagement by Assistants Juristes. Stakeholders at Arc-en-Ciel, Reseau
SIDA, and peer educators from Trans Benin and Bornes mentioned the positive
potential from developing connections between members of key and vulnerable
populations communities and law enforcement officers. A key informant from the sex 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 26 of 49
worker group Solidarite mentioned, for example, approaching the police on behalf of
women who had been victimized, asking “is this a case you can take?” to assess and
facilitate the filing of a formal legal complaint. At the same time, a key informant from
Trans Benin said bluntly, “there’s still a lot of police that harass us, all the time. There
are a lot of trans people who live in rural areas where police are not trained. There’s a
lot more work that needs to be done.”
Nonetheless, based upon interviews with key and vulnerable populations, police
abuse, including physical violence and refusal to address KVP complaints, remains
common, even as some improvement has been seen, especially around the ability of
women and MSM to report gender-based violence. In addition to inviting police officers
to trainings such as LILO, the testimony of the Police Commissioner above highlights
the need also to engage police leadership and to have officers speak to each other,
and challenge each other, on discriminatory acts and policies.
Recommendations
• Support improved governmental engagement and buy-in for human rightsrelated training for law enforcement, the judiciary and law and policymakers
(including LILO).
• Consider working with selected police precinct/site (for example, where there is
a lot of drug use and/or sex work) to develop relationships and focal points for
KP communities in each region.
• Engage health care providers in advocacy with police to convey the negative
public health impacts on the HIV epidemic of abusive policing (e.g., CEPIAC on
how police actions can harm efforts to provide HIV and methadone treatment
for PWUDs).
• Build evidence base of impact of abusive police actions on access, uptake and
adherence to HIV services by improving documentation of police activity on key
and vulnerable populations.
• Work with police training institutions towards institutionalization of
standardized, human rights and HIV curricula in pre- and in-service training
curricula for police.
(d) Legal Literacy (“know your rights”)
HIV program area
Score
Baseline
(2018)
Mid-Term
(2021)
Progress (2023)
Legal literacy (“know your
rights”) 0.5 3.0 3.5
Benin made notable progress in developing legal literacy programs between baseline
and mid-term assessments, where it was reported that 162 sensitization sessions with
key and vulnerable populations had taken place between 2018 and 2020, reaching
3128 people with information on rights and obligations, and on legal assistance
programs. A training module for transgender peer educators was also developed that 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 27 of 49
integrated basic information on HIV prevention and treatment with basic facts on
human rights, stigma and discrimination and gender-based violence.
In the current assessment, the assessment team found that legal literacy and “know
your rights” programs are effectively integrated with the provision of HIV services via
Assistants Juristes and mediators at health centers, linked to legal services when
necessary. At a hospital in Porto Novo, for example, all new patients at the HIV clinic
meet with the legal assistant to receive information on their rights and on remedies in
case of violations. Linking legal literacy activities more directly to legal assistance was
a key recommendation from the mid-term assessment, which has thus been
implemented. Peer educators are also expected to discuss human rights, genderbased violence and legal assistance in all outreach activities that they conduct in their
communities (one session per month for MSM and TG peer educators, two per month
for peers working with people who use drugs); basic legal literacy information thus
reaches significant numbers of community members.
That Mid-Term Assessment also observed that no country-wide monitoring system
existed to document cases of stigma, discrimination and other abuses. It
recommended that such a system be created so that cases documented through legal
literacy and legal services programs would be captured comprehensively. Progress
on this recommendation has been less successful, with the exception of the human
rights observatory. Arc-en-Ciel, a member of the LGBTI network Benin Synergy Plus
(BESYP), reported that they conducted monthly “know your rights” sessions led by an
Assistants Juristes in multiple sites in both groups and in 1 on 1 counseling sessions.
However, several other Assistants Juristes told us that they are not conducting such
legal literacy sessions in the communities. Several community organizations said that
they were unaware of such sessions happening.
As a result, Assistants Juristes tend to reach people who are living with HIV and
already seeking care and support their retention in services. The Assistants Juristes
at Arc-en-Ciel, for example, said that their work was mostly with female PLWHIV, often
around issues of domestic issues including spousal abuse and abandonment and child
custody disputes once HIV disclosure had been made. While these interventions are
likely to support the second two 95s of the AIDS targets, Assistants Juristes are
unlikely to reach people who are not testing and/or not reaching health facilities, for
whom stigma and discrimination may be significant obstacles to seeking testing or
treatment services. In particular, legal literacy interventions with PWUD is not
commensurate to the need, especially given increasing raids by police on sites where
drugs are used. Statistics provided by Plan Benin for the first half of 2023, for example,
clearly show how the interventions of Assistants Juristes primarily reach people living
with HIV. During that period, Assistants Juristes provided consultations to a total of
1704 people, of whom 1591 (93%) were people living with HIV, 56 (3%) were identified
as sex workers, 41 (2%) as MSM, and 7 (less than 0.5%) as transgender. None were
identified as people who use drugs. The numbers for 2022 were very similar.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 28 of 49
Consultations by Assistants Juristes per Population in 2022 and the first half of
2023
Population 2022 % First half of 2023 %
Overall 3847 100 1704 100
People living with HIV 3598 93.5 1591 93.3
MSM 99 2.6 41 2.4
Transgender 6 <0.3 7 <0.5
Sex workers 81 2.1 56 3.3
People who use drugs 6 <0.1 0 0
It is essential that Benin find ways to reach key populations in their communities with
legal literacy and access to justice interventions. It is these populations who often face
the greatest barriers to services due to stigma and discrimination. If programs to
remove human rights-related barriers to HIV services do not address their plight, they
will not contribute to the first pillar—the percentage who people who know their HIV
status.
The progress assessment team recommends that Benin introduce peer paralegals to
address this capacity gap. In countries where this model has worked successfully,
peer paralegals have generally been selected from peer educators and provided with
basic paralegal training to develop skills to do legal literacy sensitization, identify and
document human rights violations, support clients in pursuing remedies for abuses,
and link clients to professional legal support where needed. These peer paralegals
could operate in their communities and would complement the Assistants Juristes and
create greater community-based capacity for legal literacy and access to justice
programs.
Recommendations
• Assistants Juristes should increase their presence in communities of key and
vulnerable populations by conducting regular legal literacy sessions for
different population groups, including for people who use drugs. These
sessions should be organized in collaboration with community-led
organizations.
• Introduce peer paralegals as an additional tool to reach hard-to-reach
populations. These peer paralegals should work in communities to conduct
legal literacy trainings and facilitate mediation and access to justice for peers
whose rights have been violated.
• Provide greater support to CSO peer educators to enable them to become
skilled at doing basic legal literacy work, identifying cases of human rights
violations, and referring cases to Assistants Juristes (e.g., trainings and
collaborative work with AJ).
• Increase funds for legal literacy activities with people who use drugs. This
population faces widespread human rights violations, yet appeared to benefit
the least from legal literacy and access to justice activities at the time of the
assessment.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 29 of 49
(e) Increasing access to justice
HIV program area
Score
Baseline
(2018)
Mid-Term
(2021)
Progress
(2023)
Increasing access to justice 0.8 3.0 3.8
The Mid-Term assessment noted a significant expansion of access to justice programs
compared to the baseline report when there were few legal services initiatives with
limited reach in place. By contrast the mid-term assessment reported that six
Assistants Juristes, each responsible for two regions, were working. Plan Benin
estimated that Assistants Juristes had conducted more than 5,500 consultations with
key and vulnerable populations and key informants described the Assistants Juristes’
program as very successful, including cases where people who were at risk of
dropping out of treatment were retained as a result of the intervention.
During the assessment period, the number of Assistants Juristes went from 6 to 17,
significantly improving coverage and accessibility, especially for people living with HIV.
The new Assistants Juristes were trained in 2023 and mostly operational now. In the
first half of 2023, Plan Benin reported that more than 1,700 people had received
support from Assistants Juristes, a significant increase from the numbers reported in
the previous funding cycle. As noted, with the expansion of the program, Assistants
Juristes are now operational in all of Benin’s departments (provinces) and cover most
major hospitals that provide HIV services although Assistants Juristes continue to be
stretched across multiple health facilities. Plan Benin has engaged a law office to
support Assistants Juristes and take cases that require formal legal representation
through proceedings.
Because Assistants Juristes are embedded in health centers and do not usually
operate in communities, this program has significantly improved access to justice for
key and vulnerable populations who engage with the healthcare system. However,
many of the most marginalized members of these populations—especially key
populations such as people who use drugs and transgender people—are less likely to
seek health services, and therefore, at present, have little opportunity to benefit from
these interventions. For the first half of 2023, for example, Plan Benin reported that it
had registered 28 cases of human rights violations. 26 of them concerned people living
with HIV, one was an MSM, and the final case was unspecified. For 2022, 18 total
cases were registered, 15 of which concerned people living with HIV and 3 MSM.
While providing legal support to people living with HIV is very important—and
contributes to Benin’s achievement of objectives related to treatment and viral load
suppression—it is essential that this program find ways to ensure these services are
available also to key populations in their communities and support progress toward
the first 95 target. As described above, we recommend that this be done through peer
paralegals operating in their communities. 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 30 of 49
The cases registered in the first half of 2023 were reported by 19 women and 8 men
(for one case gender was not included); in 2022, it was 12 and 6 respectively. Many
of the cases reported by women were described to researchers as instances where
women tested positive for HIV and faced rights abuses by their families – including,
physical violence, being thrown out of their home, and/or having their children taken
away from them. Among the 2023 cases, in 13 survivors of abuse opted for mediation;
in another 13 formal judicial proceedings were started. In 2 cases, the survivors did
not want to take further action. Outcomes for many of the judicial cases were pending
although a few had advanced through the legal process with positive results for the
plaintiffs.
Various stakeholders noted in interviews that navigating the justice system remains
difficult, with significant costs for individuals whose rights have been violated,
especially those who have experienced gender-based violence, to access medical
records and to issue orders to appear of perpetrators that are necessary to present
their case formally. In addition to cost, fear of stigma, discrimination, loss of privacy
and retaliation remain formidable barriers to seeking justice. Some Assistants Juristes
also mentioned their workload (which can be more than 40 clients) as a challenge.
Training workshops with judges and lawyers had been conducted during the review
period by REBAP+, which emphasized that there was a need to expand the trainings
and ensure that all judges were trained. Commenting on the challenges of the judicial
system and the frequent use of mediation as an alternative, an individual with REBAP+
highlighted the importance of privacy and encouraged closed hearings as a way to
see the completion of more judicial cases. In one case he noted that the male partner
of a woman living with HIV took a picture of her HIV test result and circulated it within
her community. Having already lost her privacy, the woman agreed to seeking redress
through the judiciary but the process took three months and more than 300,000 cfa
(US$500).
In contrast to their experience with female PLWHIV facing domestic issues, Arc-enCiel said key populations were more likely to seek redress via the judiciary, although
cases were still relatively uncommon. An Assistants Juristes from the organization said
that: “It can be difficult, and people are afraid to bring a case. There’s a lot of fear of
the justice system”.
As the case data for the first half of 2023 shows—and consistent with the situation in
other BDB countries—many key and vulnerable populations prefer mediation to formal
legal proceedings. Indeed, in some cases, mediation may also be a better option for
ensuring continued access to HIV services than lengthy judicial proceedings (for
example, a woman who has been evicted from her house due to a positive HIV test
needs an urgent solution to ensure she has shelter and income, something that
mediation is often more likely to provide than a formal legal complaint). Yet, Assistants
Juristes told the assessment team that they are not specifically trained to provide
mediation services. One said that he had been reading up on mediation in his spare
time. It is essential that Assistants Juristes are able to offer the full spectrum of 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 31 of 49
services to remedy human rights violations so their clients can make an informed
choice about the remedy they prefer.
The assessment team concludes that documentation on cases and their outcomes
needs to be strengthened so that access to justice efforts can be more fully evaluated
and analysis of these cases can be used to engage government and other actors to
address structural issues that emerge from them. Stronger evidence of outcomes in
formal judicial cases favoring key and vulnerable populations could also in turn compel
participation and compliance with mediation for those who choose that route. In
addition, further training is needed with magistrates and judges on HIV and the rights
of key populations.
Recommendations
• Expand support for access to justice through increasing the number of
Assistants Juristes working with KP/VP CSOs and in communities.
• Introduce peer paralegals to work in communities to increase legal literacy,
provide paralegal consultations, conduct basic mediation, and link clients to
Assistants Juristes where formal legal services and more advanced mediation
may be needed.
• Ensure that Assistants Juristes and peer paralegals receive training to develop
knowledge on mediation and mediation skills.
• Provide support for improved data collection on outcomes of access to justice
initiatives (including mediation and litigation) and impact on health care
outcomes
• Increase training with support from Ministry of Justice of police and judicial
officers, including participation in LILO and other trainings.
(f) Improving laws, regulations and policies relating to HIV and HIV/TB
HIV program area
Score
Baseline
(2018)
Mid-Term
(2021)
Progress
(2023)
Improving laws, regulations and policies
relating to HIV and HIV/TB 0 0.5 0.5
The baseline and mid-term assessments noted limited activities associated with
monitoring and reforming laws, regulations and policies related to HIV and relatively
little has changed in the current assessment. For example, both the baseline and MidTerm assessments noted problematic aspects of the country’s HIV law, including
related to lack of confidentiality of HIV diagnosis and criminalization of HIV
transmission. Amendments to the law are still pending.
One clear positive outcome was the opening of a methadone maintenance treatment
facility in November 2023. This effort can be traced back to steps taken in 2018 and
2019 when the health ministry initiated bi-annual meetings with the country’s drug 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 32 of 49
authority to ensure HIV prevention programs for people who inject drugs, such as a
needle exchange pilot and a planned substitution treatment pilot, could operate without
police interference. With the opening of the facility should come opportunities for closer
engagement and education of police and discussion of the need for further services,
including facilities in other parts of the city and country, and of the possibility of takehome methadone supplies. Additional legal frameworks may be needed to support
methadone distribution – including for take home doses. UNODC is currently working
on a model law in Burkina Faso that may provide a model for Benin.
Further development of this program area is limited by few specific resources in the
Global Fund grant for policy advocacy despite clear legal and policy challenges
affecting key populations, including the criminalization of drug use. Although there is
no specific law that criminalize LGBTI populations, lack of gender identity recognition
laws impedes access to services.
Community-led organizations also lack capacity and training on monitoring rights
abuses and conducting advocacy and should be supported with additional resources
in future grants, with the goal of more clearly identifying structural barriers to access
to HIV services (e.g., linking data on increase in police raids of communities of PWUD
to advocacy).
Recommendations
• Consider focus on Cotonou, as part of UNAIDS’ “Fast Track” cities initiative
to be a model for piloting new regulations and policies respecting rights of
key and vulnerable populations
• Use catalytic funds to support legal and policy advocacy initiatives by
community-led organizations.
• Support community-led organizations to develop and implement joint
advocacy efforts and provide them with advocacy training.
• Build on documentation efforts by BESYP and others to more systematically
collection data on incidents of rights abuses, and use that data to inform
policy advocacy. Collecting detailed documentation of police abuses against
people who use drugs, in particular, should be a priority.
(g) Reducing HIV-related gender discrimination, harmful gender
norms and violence against women and girls in all their diversity
HIV program area
Score
Baseline
(2018)
Mid-Term
(2021)
Progress
(2023)
Reducing HIV-related gender
discrimination, harmful gender norms and
violence against women and girls in all
their diversity
1.5 1.5 2.0
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 33 of 49
Both baseline and Mid-Term assessments found limited efforts related to addressing
gender-based discrimination, and no change between the two periods. The Mid-Term
report highlighted that Plan Benin had sought to mainstream a gender component into
its work, integrating gender-based violence into its regular bi-annual consultations with
local stakeholders in all 12 regions and integrating gender-based violence into
sensitization sessions with law enforcement and judicial officials. It also noted that
Benin had made progress in addressing barriers to services for transgender
populations. However, the Mid-Term assessment identified few activities specifically
focused on removing gender discrimination as a barrier to HIV services.
In the current assessment, it was clear that Assistants Juristes play a key role in
supporting individuals experiencing GBV to navigate health and legal systems, and
can mediate, when appropriate, with family members to ensure that the rights of
survivors of GBV rights are respected. Other positive outcomes in relation to reduced
HIV-related gender discrimination were seen in terms of increased acceptance of
MSM in the healthcare system and some progress with police. Among women who
inject drugs, the methadone clinic, CEPIAC recognizing the barriers women who use
drugs face seeking reproductive health care at many health centers and plan to
introduce maternity services for women who use drugs.
In 2021, the ministry of social affairs and microfinancing and the CLNS-TP, with
support from UNAIDS, conducted an HIV gender assessment, which concluded that
“gender issues and challenges are not well reflected in the national response to HIV.”
Among others, it noted that “the socio-cultural context is strongly marked by attitudes
unfavorable to women, with low school enrolment rates for girls, lower incomes, a high
incidence of physical and psychological violence, an inheritance and matrimonial
system governed by customary law that puts women at a disadvantage, and lack of
access to land. These factors keep women dependent on men, creating a breeding
ground for the spread of HIV/AIDS.” It also concluded that “[h]omosexuality, sex work
and injecting drug use are categories of practices that are not accepted by society and
considered to be vectors of HIV, leading to stigmatization and discrimination against
HIV carriers.” It recommended a series of steps to address these challenges, including
revitalizing the educational context and the specific dimensions of gender
mainstreaming. Plan Benin and the HIV program at the Ministry of Health are
developing of a holistic national action plan for the prevention and management of
gender-based violence and human rights violations. Plan Benin has conducted a
systematic gender analysis across all of its programs in order to ensure that they are
gender-transformative and that gender perspectives are fully mainstreamed.
Several limitations were also seen in relation to addressing HIV-related gender
discrimination, including the need for more community engagement and attention to
needs of adolescent girls, including holistic sexual and reproductive health services,
instead of addressing gender discrimination and gender-based violence after the fact. 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 34 of 49
Key populations, including MSM and transgender individuals, need greater support
and inclusion in training including in health centers as mediators and Assistants
Juristes. One animatrice from Trans Benin said “Trans organization are not as strong
as they could be. There’s not enough opportunity for leadership.” The animatrice also
highlighted the need for support for hormone therapy as a strategy to both increase
self-esteem and to reduce self- and community stigma.
Recommendations
• Adopt and implement the national plan on the prevention of gender-based
violence.
• Take advantage of ongoing HIV community and media activities to reinforce
and support anti-GBV messages
• Expand holistic sexual and reproductive health services for adolescent girls
• Expand inclusion of qualified MSM and Transgender individuals in health
centers as mediators, Assistants Juristes, and peer paralegals
• Establish one stop centers for the management of gender-based violence which
includes legal services and the provision of HIV and sexual and reproductive health
services
(h) Community mobilization & human rights advocacy
HIV program area
Score
Baseline
(2018)
Mid-Term
(2021)
Progress
(2023)
Community mobilization and human
rights advocacy * * 2.0
Support for community mobilization and human rights advocacy is a new program area
for the Breaking Down Barriers assessments, hence there are no baseline or MidTerm scores to compare with the current Progress Assessment. In the current
assessment, while a range of community mobilization and human rights advocacy
activities were noted, considerably more attention could be focused on this program
area.
Identified as strengths in this area is the fact that each key and vulnerable population
has one or more community-led organizations representing them, and that communityled organizations play important roles in the implementation of various key human
rights activities, including training of police and magistrates and LILO. In addition,
various community-led organizations work closely with health service providers
through mediators, training activities, and referral services to reduce stigma and
discrimination at testing and treatment sites.
However, community-led organizations implement few, if any, programs supported
through catalytic human rights funds. They generally play a supporting role to activities
that are implemented by Plan Benin, which limits their ability to grow as leaders in the 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 35 of 49
HIV response. None of the Assistants Juristes participating in the program were from
key and vulnerable populations, and inclusion of community-led organizations for
PWUD and TG appears significantly weaker than that of MSM and SW organizations.
Community-led organizations seemed insufficiently aware of, and unlikely to
participate in, strategic decision-making by Plan Benin and the Benin CCM regarding
activities to remove human rights-related barriers. As a result, the knowledge and
insights of these organizations is not reflected in decisions around programming. The
specific needs and perspectives of the transgender population are often not
adequately represented in some activities or decision-making processes where other
broader LGBT groups are present.
Recommendations
• Provide direct support to KP/VP CSOs to develop and implement their own
activities and interventions.
• Provide technical support to community-led organizations to ensure that
develop their capacity to implement programs and develop further as leaders
in the HIV response.
• Ensure that, whenever possible, Assistants Juristes are representatives of
key and vulnerable populations. In recruitment decisions, preference should
be given to hiring people from key and vulnerable populations.
• Recruit, train and implement a peer paralegal component, including
representatives from each key and vulnerable population to work in
communities to improve legal literacy, provide basic mediation services, and
refer cases that require more complex interventions to Assistants Juristes.
• Ensure that LILO trainings for police, health workers, religious leaders, etc.
always include multiple representatives of key and vulnerable populations.
LILO trainings are known to forge strong connections between participants.
Diverse and consistent KVP participation will help build relationships that
community-led organizations will be able to use for mediation, advocacy, and
other key interventions.
• Clearly differentiate between MSM and TG so that both populations are
represented in interventions and in decision-making processes where
appropriate. MSM and TG have different needs and interests so
representation of TG by MSM is often not appropriate.
• Continue support for CLM initiatives. The Human Rights Observatory should
be managed, as much as possible, by community-led organizations and
should be used to address human rights issues on a case-by-case basis but
also to identify and address structural challenges that negatively impact on
the treatment cascade.
• Support improved communication of CLM findings to community members
and ensure meaningful participation in development of response and
recommendations.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 36 of 49
5.2 Implementation status of program essentials
Starting with GC7, countries are required to report on the implementation status of
program essentials for HIV, TB and malaria. Program essentials are a set of standards
for the delivery of services by Global Fund-supported programs. All applicants are
required, as they fill out the Essential Data Tables to support their funding requests,
to provide an update on their country’s status towards achieving program essentials.
HIV applicants from Core and High Impact countries are also asked to describe in their
funding request narrative any plans to address program essentials that are not fulfilled.
In addition, the conditions for countries qualifying for the human rights matching fund
requires funding requests to not only consider the findings of the most recent
assessment of progress made in scaling up programs to reduce human rights-related
barriers, but also to ensure the full implementation of all human rights program
essentials.
HIV and human rights-related program essentials are:
• Prevention and treatment programs for key and vulnerable populations
integrate interventions to reduce human rights- and gender-related barriers to
these programs.
• Stigma and discrimination reduction activities for people living with HIV and key
populations are undertaken in health care and other settings.
• Legal literacy and access to justice activities are accessible to people living with
HIV and key populations.
• Support is provided to efforts, including community-led efforts, to analyze and
reform criminal and other harmful laws, policies and practices that hinder
effective HIV responses.15
The tables below present the progress assessment team’s summary analyses of
Benin’s progress on the program essentials for HIV.
Human rights Are all elements
of a supportive
environment16 for
effective
operationalizatio
n of the program
essentials in
place?
Implementation
Status
15 “Technical Brief: Removing Human Rights-related Barriers to HIV Services,” The Global Fund, accessed 10 April 2023,
https://www.theglobalfund.org/media/12445/core_removing-barriers-to-hiv-services_technicalbrief_en.pdf
16 1. a recent assessment of human rights-related barriers; 2. a country-owned, costed plan/strategy to reduce
barriers; 3. an oversight mechanism to oversee implementation
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 37 of 49
19. HIV programs for key and vulnerable
populations integrate interventions to reduce
human rights- and gender-related barriers.
Yes Some programs17
20. Stigma and discrimination reduction
activities for people living with HIV and key
populations are undertaken in health care and
other settings.
Yes Some programs18
21. Legal literacy and access to justice activities
are accessible to people living with HIV and key
populations.
Yes Activities/program
s at sub-national
level19
22. Support is provided to efforts, including
community-led efforts, to analyze and reform
criminal and other harmful laws, policies and
practices that hinder effective HIV responses.
Yes Some support20
Benin has made some progress toward fully implementing the HIV program essentials,
but many challenges remain. In terms of the integration of interventions to reduce
human rights- and gender-related barriers for key and vulnerable populations (#19 and
#20), Benin has targeted specific health facilities as regional leaders in the
implementation of integrated and comprehensive support, using psychosocial, legal
and peer educators working alongside clinical staff. This approach should be justly
recognized as a significant advance in ensuring that KVPs can access care and stay
in treatment without disruption from discrimination and stigma. Having been shown to
be feasible and effective, it should be scaled up nationally.
Legal literacy and access to justice activities (#21) similarly remain in need of further
resources to ensure that all PLWH and key populations can benefit. Limitations in
terms of community engagement hinder broader efforts to ensure that KPs are
17 Response options include: No or few programs integrate such interventions; Some programs; Many or all
programs
18 Response options include: No or one-off activities/programs; Small-scale activities/programs in health care and
at last one other setting; Activities/programs in health care and at least two other settings at sub-national level
(less than 50% national coverage); Activities/programs in health care and three or more other settings at
national level (more than 90% national coverage)
19 Response options include: No or one-off legal literacy and access to justice activities/programs; Small-scale
activities/programs; Activities/programs at sub-national level (less than 50% national coverage);
Activities/programs at national level (more than 90% national coverage)
20 Response options include: No support; Some support; Comprehensive support (including to community-led
efforts)
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 38 of 49
exposed to know your rights campaigns and will require training of more peer
educators and resources for their mobilization and linkage to Assistants Juristes and
other legal services providers. Barriers to access to justice, such as costs for medical
records and orders to appear, as well as trainings of jurists and magistrates, need to
be addressed and scaled-up nationally. Finally, support for community-led analysis
and advocacy related to harmful laws, policies and practices requires significant new
investment. All of these activities require continued support for community-led
organizations to lead in these efforts.
5.3 Cross-cutting observations
Overall, though the programs to remove rights-related barriers to HIV services in Benin
remain less than comprehensive in scale, the current assessment found robust civil
society organizations capable of expanding their current efforts and keen to directly
manage trainings, interventions and community-led monitoring activities, rather than
serve as a resource for larger international organizations. Supporting these
organizations is critical to their growth and professionalization and to the sustainability
of Benin’s progress to date.
Although CLM activities have been minimal, a key informant from UNAIDS cited their
support for REBAP+ and ITPC to harmonize an overall CLM strategy and guide, and
trainings in 19 sites.
Community-led organizations however need particular support in terms of stronger
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and financial management skills. The assessment
was made more difficult by a lack of documentation about program activities and
outputs, outcomes and purported impact. Building this type of M&E system is essential
to understand if the human rights activities are reducing barriers and influencing
access to services. If needed, implementers should be encouraged to access technical
assistance on M&E issues through the Global Fund’s Human Rights Strategic
Initiative.
Recommendations
• The human rights working group should be reactivated or reconstituted and
meet regularly to discuss and coordinate ongoing implementation of the fiveyear plan and of programs to remove human rights-related barriers to HIV
services. Resources should be reprogrammed to support these meetings.
• The human rights working group should be tasked with reviewing the fiveyear plan, which currently ends December 31, 2024, to decide whether to
extend and/or update it, or develop a new plan.
• Government agencies should closely engage with civil society organizations
on the implementation of the five-year plan. Government agencies should, in
particular, commit to advancing the institutionalization of training on stigma
and discrimination into pre- and in-service curricula for health workers, police
and justice officials. 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 39 of 49
• Global Fund should provide technical support for implementation of human
rights programs, including to support the PR and human rights SR, as
necessary.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 40 of 49
Key Recommendations
Aligned with findings in this report, the following recommendations are prioritized for
support from the program areas and cross-cutting themes described above:
Program Area Recommendations
Eliminate stigma
and discrimination
in all settings.
• Expand LILO trainings, ensuring that members of key and
vulnerable populations- networks participate in all of them
and develop relationships with other participants.
• Expand number of Assistants Juristes working with health
centers and with Key Population CSOs to allow for greater
engagement in the community (as opposed to at health
centers)
• Introduce peer paralegals among peer educators to work in
communities with their peers to improve legal literacy,
intervene in cases of stigma, discrimination and GBV at
community level, and reduce self-stigma.
• Support stronger CSO documentation of rights abuses in the
populations they serve and build capacity to use
documented finding to advocate for structural changes.
Ensure non‐
discriminatory
provision of health
care
• Implement strategies to ensure privacy for patients seeking
HIV testing and care in health centers.
• Ensure that training on stigma and discrimination is
integrated into health worker education programs, including
pre- and in-service trainings to allow for KP friendly service
provision. This should include material related to people who
use drugs and transgender people.
• Strengthen reporting mechanisms for incidents of
discrimination in health settings.
• Recruit Assistants Juristes among members of key
populations whenever possible.
Ensure rights‐
based law
enforcement
practices
• Support improved governmental engagement and buy-in for
human rights-related training for law enforcement, the
judiciary and law and policymakers (including LILO).
• Consider working with selected police precinct/site (for
example, where there is a lot of drug use and/or sex work)
to develop relationships and focal points for KP communities
in each region.
• Engage health care providers in advocacy with police to
convey the negative public health impacts on the HIV
epidemic of abusive policing (e.g., CEPIAC on how police
actions can harm efforts to provide HIV and methadone
treatment for PWUDs).
• Build evidence base of impact of abusive police actions on
access, uptake and adherence to HIV services by improving
documentation of police activity on key and vulnerable
populations.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 41 of 49
• Work with police training institutions towards
institutionalization of standardized, human rights and HIV
curricula in pre- and in-service training curricula for police.
Improve legal
literacy
• Assistants Juristes should increase their presence in
communities of key and vulnerable populations by
conducting regular legal literacy sessions for different
population groups, including for people who use drugs.
These sessions should be organized in collaboration with
community-led organizations.
• Introduce peer paralegals as an additional tool to reach
hard-to-reach populations. These peer paralegals should
work in communities to conduct legal literacy trainings and
facilitate mediation and access to justice for peers whose
rights have been violated.
• Provide greater support to CSO peer educators to enable
them to become skilled at doing basic legal literacy work,
identifying cases of human rights violations, and referring
cases to Assistants Juristes (e.g., trainings and collaborative
work with AJ).
• Increase funds for legal literacy activities with people who
use drugs. This population faces widespread human rights
violations, yet appeared to benefit the least from legal
literacy and access to justice activities at the time of the
assessment.
Improve access to
justice
• Expand support for access to justice through increasing the
number of Assistants Juriste working with KP/VP CSOs and
in communities.
• Introduce peer paralegals to work in communities to
increase legal literacy, provide paralegal consultations,
conduct basic mediation, and link clients to Assistants
Juristes where formal legal services and more advanced
mediation may be needed.
• Ensure that Assistants Juristes and peer paralegals receive
training to develop knowledge on mediation and mediation
skills.
• Provide support for improved data collection on outcomes of
access to justice initiatives (including mediation and
litigation) and impact on health care outcomes
• Increase training with support from Ministry of Justice of
police and judicial officers, including participation in LILO
and other trainings.
Improving laws
and policies
relating to HIV and
HIV/TB
• Consider focus on Cotonou, as part of UNAIDS’ “Fast Track”
cities initiative to be a model for piloting new regulations and
policies respecting rights of key and vulnerable populations
• Use catalytic funds to support legal and policy advocacy
initiatives by community-led organizations.
• Support community-led organizations to develop and
implement joint advocacy efforts and provide them with
advocacy training.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 42 of 49
• Build on documentation efforts by BESYP and others to
more systematically collection data on incidents of rights
abuses, and use that data to inform policy advocacy.
Collecting detailed documentation of police abuses against
people who use drugs, in particular, should be a priority.
Reduce HIVrelated gender
discrimination
• Adopt and implement the national plan on the prevention of
gender-based violence.
• Take advantage of ongoing HIV community and media
activities to reinforce and support anti-GBV messages
• Expand holistic sexual and reproductive health services for
adolescent girls
• Expand inclusion of qualified MSM and Transgender
individuals in health centers as mediators, Assistants
Juristes, and peer paralegals
• Establish one stop centers for the management of genderbased violence which includes legal services and the
provision of HIV and sexual and reproductive health services
Community
mobilization and
advocacy for
HIV/TB
• Provide direct support to KP/VP CSOs to develop and
implement their own activities and interventions.
• Provide technical support to community-led organizations to
ensure that develop their capacity to implement programs
and develop further as leaders in the HIV response
• Ensure that, whenever possible, Assistants Juristes are
representatives of key and vulnerable populations. In
recruitment decisions, preference should be given to hiring
people from key and vulnerable populations.
• Recruit, train and implement a peer paralegal component,
including representatives from each key and vulnerable
population to work in communities to improve legal literacy,
provide basic mediation services, and refer cases that
require more complex interventions to Assistants Juristes.
• Ensure that LILO trainings for police, health workers,
religious leaders, etc. always include multiple
representatives of key and vulnerable populations. LILO
trainings are known to forge strong connections between
participants. Diverse and consistent KVP participation will
help build relationships that community-led organizations
will be able to use for mediation, advocacy, and other key
interventions.
• Clearly differentiate between MSM and TG so that both
populations are represented in interventions and in decisionmaking processes where appropriate. MSM and TG have
different needs and interests so representation of TG by
MSM is often not appropriate.
• Continue support for CLM initiatives. The Human Rights
Observatory should be managed, as much as possible, by
community-led organizations and should be used to address
human rights issues on a case-by-case basis but also to 
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 43 of 49
identify and address structural challenges that negatively
impact on the treatment cascade.
• Support improved communication of CLM findings to
community members and ensure meaningful participation in
development of response and recommendations.
Cross-cutting
Recommendations
• The human rights working group should be reactivated or
reconstituted and meet regularly to discuss and coordinate
ongoing implementation of the five-year plan and of
programs to remove human rights-related barriers to HIV
services. Resources should be reprogrammed to support
these meetings.
• The human rights working group should be tasked with
reviewing the five-year plan, which currently ends December
31, 2024, to decide whether to extend and/or update it, or
develop a new plan.
• Government agencies should closely engage with civil
society organizations on the implementation of the five-year
plan. Government agencies should, in particular, commit to
advancing the institutionalization of training on stigma and
discrimination into pre- and in-service curricula for health
workers, police and justice officials.
• Global Fund should provide technical support for
implementation of human rights programs, including to
support the PR and human rights SR, as necessary.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 44 of 49
Annex 1: Scorecard Methodology
A key component of the progress assessment is the review of specific programs and
the preparation of key performance indicator scores for the Global Fund. Drawing upon
the data collected from program reports and key informant interviews, in addition to
the descriptive analysis of findings for each program area, the assessment team also
developed a quantitative scorecard to assess scale up of HIV, TB and, where
applicable, malaria programs engaged in removing human rights barriers.
Criteria/Definitions
Scoring is based on the following categories measuring achievement of
comprehensive programs. First, researchers should determine the overall category
with integers 0‐5 based upon geographic scale:
Rating Value Definition21
0
No programs
present No formal programs or activities identified.
1 One‐off activities Time‐limited, pilot initiative.
2 Small scale
On‐going initiative with limited geographic scale (e.g., a single or
small number of locations – less than 20% of national scale) and
capacity for
reaching the targeted population.
3
Operating at
subnational
level
Operating at subnational level (btw 20% to 50% national scale)
4
Operating at
national level Operating at national level (>50% of national scale)
5
At scale at national
level (>90%)
At scale is defined as more than 90% of national scale, where
relevant, and more than 90% of the population
Goal Impact on services
continuum
Impact on services continuum is defined as:
a) Human rights programs at scale for all populations; and
b) Plausible causal links between programs, reduced barriers
to services and increased access to HIV/TB services.
Next, researchers can adjust scores within the category based upon reach of relevant
target populations:
Additional points Criteria
+0 Limited scale for some target
populations (reaching <35%)
+0.3 Achieved scale to approximately half of
target populations (reaching between
35 ‐ 65% of target populations)
21 The definition of the term “comprehensive” has been developed through extensive consultation, internally within CRG and
MECA as well as externally, with the research consortia carrying out the baseline assessments and the members of the
Working Group on Monitoring and Evaluating Programmes to Remove Human Rights Barriers to HIV, TB and Malaria Services.
UNAIDS and WHO have been consulted as a member of the Working Group.
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 45 of 49
+0.6 Achieved widespread scale for most
target populations (reaching >65% of
target populations)
Additionally, where a score cannot be calculated the following can be noted:
Notation Meaning Explanation
N/A Not applicable Used when the indicator cannot be logically assessed
* Unable to assess Used when researchers were unable to determine a score.
** Not a program
area at the time
of scoring
Program area did not exist at the time of the calculation of the
scorecard at either baseline, mid-term or both
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 46 of 49
Annex 2: Key Informants, Site Visits, Beneficiary
Interviews and Validation Meeting Participants
Key informants
# Name Organization Type of meeting
1. Plan International
Benin
SODOLOUFO Odile, Chef
Projet UCFM
Plan International
Benin
2. Dr AHOUDA Carin,
Épidémiologiste
interniste,
Responsable
Dr AHOUDA Carin,
Épidémiologiste
interniste,
Responsable
3. Partenariat et
Spécialiste Santé
Partenariat et
Spécialiste Santé
4. TESSY Lustre,
Juriste
TESSY Lustre,
Juriste
5. SRPS Dr AVIANSOU Annonciat,
Coordonnatrice SRPSS
SRPS
6. IDRISSOU
Mouniratou,
Responsable santé
communautaire et
mobilisation sociale
IDRISSOU
Mouniratou,
Responsable santé
communautaire et
mobilisation sociale
7. Arc en Ciel ZOMASSI Larissa,
Assistante Juriste
Arc en Ciel
8. PNT DEDEHOUANOU Sessi,
Responsable Suivi
évaluation PNT
PNT
9. ODOUNLAMI
Evelyne, Assistante
sociale/SCMS/PNT
ODOUNLAMI
Evelyne, Assistante
sociale/SCMS/PNT
10. GNONLOFOUN
Clément, Spécialiste
Promotion de la
santé/SCMS/PNT
GNONLOFOUN
Clément, Spécialiste
Promotion de la
santé/SCMS/PNT
11. FHI360/EAWA
(PEPFAR)
Dr TOHON Dorcas,
Responsable technique
offres de service
FHI360/EAWA
(PEPFAR)
12. BESYP BANKOLE Kamal Deen,
Directeur Exécutif
BESYP
13. HOUESSOU
Jeannot, Chargé de
Programmes
HOUESSOU
Jeannot, Chargé de
Programmes
14. KPAKPO Gaétan,
Responsable Suivi
Evaluation
KPAKPO Gaétan,
Responsable Suivi
Evaluation
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 47 of 49
15. Réseau Sida Bénin DOUKPO Maurès,
Directeur Exécutif RSB
Réseau Sida Bénin
16. GANMOU Euphrem,
Chargé de
programmes
GANMOU Euphrem,
Chargé de
programmes
17. CHAGAS Elyoth,
PCA/RSB
CHAGAS Elyoth,
PCA/RSB
18. AKLOBO Salomon,
Animateur RSB
AKLOBO Salomon,
Animateur RSB
19. RéBAP+ HOUNGBO Rock, Directeur
Exécutif
RéBAP+
20. NASSARA Valentin,
PCA/RéBAP+
NASSARA Valentin,
PCA/RéBAP+
Focus Group Discussions (FGD) (Organization facilitating the FGD and number
of participants)
Cibles
Number of
participants
Focus group RéBAP
# of participants PLHIV 7
Focus group Solidarité
# of participants Sex Workers 7
Focus group RSB
# of participants MSM 8
Focus group Bornes
# of participants PWUD 7
Focus group Transgenres
# of participants Transgender 7
Total participants 36
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 48 of 49
Annex 3: Documents reviewed
ASSAP-TB/Benin, PNLT Benin, Plan d’Action TB CRG et cadre de responsabilite du
Benin 2024-2026, 2022
CNLS-TP et al, Rapport de l’enquete index de la stigmatisation (Index Stigma) 2.0
des personnes vivant avec le VIH au Benin, 2021
CNLS-TP, National Strategic Plan to Reduce Human Rights-related Barriers to HIV,
TB and Malaria Services Benin 2020-2024
CNLS-TP, PSLS, Plan International Benin, Manuel de formation integre sur le
VIDH/Sida, les IST, les questions de Stigmatisation, Discrimination, Droits humains,
Violence basees sur le Genre prenant en compte les specificites de chaque
populations cle et vulnerale, November 2023
CNLS-TP, Etude sur l’evaluation de la protection sociale sensible au VIH au Benin,
2022
CNLS-TP, Evaluation du genre liee au VIH au Benin, 2021
Funding Request 2021-2023
Global Fund detailed budget CNLS-TP grant GC6
Global Fund detailed budget Plan International Benin grant GC6
Global Fund detailed budget C19RM grant
Global Fund, Benin allocation letter 2021-2023
Plan International Benin, Data base legal cases 2022
Plan International Benin, Data base legal cases, first half 2023
Plan International Benin, Rapport monitoring, Annee 2022, February 2023
Plan International Benin, Rapport semestrial 1, 2023
Plan International Benin, Rapport Semestriel 1, 2022
Plan International Benin, Role and qualities of the peer educator, no date
Plan International Benin, Peer educator contract 2021-2023
Plan International Benin, List of Assistants Juristes
Benin Progress Assessment
Page 49 of 49
Plan International Benin, Document de Strategies d’Appui Juridique dans le Cadre
de la Lutte contre le VIH/SIDA au Benin, 2021
Plan International Benin, Rapport mensuel de gestion de cas VBG
UNAIDS, Index de la stigmatization et de la discrimination des PVVIH au Benin,
2016
