Focal points:
Ms M. Van der Velden
Regional Director a.i.
Western Africa
email: margot.vandervelden@wfp.org
Mr A. Ouattara
Country Director
email: ali.ouattara@wfp.org
World Food Programme, Via Cesare Giulio Viola, 68/70, 00148 Rome, Italy
Executive Board
Second regular session
Rome, 13–16 November 2023
Distribution: General
Date: 3 October 2023
Original: English
Agenda item 7
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1
Operational matters – Country strategic plans
For approval
Executive Board documents are available on WFP’s website (https://executiveboard.wfp.org).
Benin country strategic plan (2024–2027)
Duration 1 January 2024–31 December 2027
Total cost to WFP USD 386,427,465
Gender and age marker* 3
* https://gender.manuals.wfp.org/en/gender-toolkit/gender-in-programming/gender-and-age-marker/.
Executive summary
Benin is a lower-middle-income country of 13.7 million inhabitants with a gross domestic product
of USD 17.1 billion. The country has a young population, with two thirds of Beninese aged
under 25. The population is unevenly distributed: 70 percent live in the southern quarter of the
country. The national poverty rate is 38.5 percent, rising to almost 44.2 percent in rural areas.
Benin ranked 166 of 191 countries in the Human Development Index in 2022. The primary school
completion rate declined from 81 percent in 2016 to 62 percent in 2020, before picking up again
to 73 percent in 2021.
Food insecurity remains high. The latest cadre harmonisé figures estimate that 547,422 Beninese
are severely food insecure (in Integrated Food Security Phase Classification phase 3 or 4). Almost
83 percent of households are unable to afford a healthy diet.
WFP has been supporting the Government of Benin since 2017 with the implementation of the
national integrated school feeding programme (programme national d’alimentation scolaire intégré),
which reaches 75 percent of public primary schools. The Government has committed to ensuring
full coverage of all primary schools and has already allocated more than USD 200 million for a 
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 2
five-year cycle of the programme. WFP has been requested to implement the national programme
and will continue to support the enhancement and extension of the programme with the aim of
strengthening community resilience and programme sustainability, mainly through the promotion
of local procurement and home-grown school feeding.
This country strategic plan is based on the analysis and strategic orientation of the Government’s
national action plan for 2021–2026 and the United Nations sustainable development cooperation
framework. It envisages a continuation of WFP’s implementation of the national school feeding
programme and the provision of technical assistance and policy advisory work, leveraging WFP’s
successful and long-lasting partnerships with the Government and other national and
international stakeholders to achieve three country strategic plan outcomes:
➢ Outcome 1: People affected by shocks in Benin can meet urgent food and nutrition
needs before, during and after shocks, by 2027.
➢ Outcome 2: School-age children and communities in Benin have access to affordable,
nutritious diets and basic social services as a result of the leveraging of the school
feeding programme as an entry point for the achievement of enhanced nutrition,
health and education outcomes, by 2027.
➢ Outcome 3: Targeted institutions and systems in Benin have strengthened capacity to
implement school feeding and other inclusive programmes to promote food security
and nutrition, by 2027.
The country strategic plan provides support in strategic areas prioritized by the Government and
through it, WFP will endeavour to respond to challenges related to gender inequality. In addition
to contributing to the achievement of Sustainable Development Goals 2 and 17, the country
strategic plan will enhance Benin’s capability to achieve Sustainable Development Goals 1
(no poverty), 4 (quality education) and 5 (gender equality). Implementation of the plan will
contribute to the achievement of WFP strategic outcomes 1 (People are better able to meet their
urgent food and nutrition needs), 2 (People have better nutrition, health and education outcomes)
and 4 (National programmes and systems are strengthened).
Draft decision*
The Board approves the Benin country strategic plan (2024–2027) (WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1) at a total
cost to WFP of USD 386,427,465.
* This is a draft decision. For the final decision adopted by the Board, please refer to the decisions and recommendations
document issued at the end of the session.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 3
1. Country analysis
1.1 Country context
1. Benin has experienced stability and a culture of peaceful transition of power since 1990. The
current government, backed with an absolute majority at the parliament, has launched
ambitious structural reforms to strengthen democracy and governance, transform the
economy and improve social welfare.
2. However, Benin faces the threat of a spillover of the conflict in the Central Sahel and the
activities of organized transnational crime, particularly in the north. This could present a
challenge to the achievement of the Government’s national action plan for 2021–2026 and
the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
3. Benin is a lower-middle-income country of 13.7 million inhabitants. Forty-nine percent of
the population live in urban areas,
1 43 percent are under the age of 142 and two thirds are
under 25. The national poverty rate stood at 38.5 percent in 2019, a decrease from
40.1 percent in 2015. Nearly 44.2 percent of people in rural areas are poor, compared with
31.4 percent in urban areas.
3
4. The Beninese economy has shown resilience in the face of the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) crisis. The economy rebounded strongly in 2021, growing at an estimated
7.2 percent, up from 3.8 percent in 2020.
4 Agriculture contributes to 35 percent of Benin’s
gross domestic product and generates 70 percent of employment and 72 percent of
imports. However, it is dependent on rainfall and vulnerable to the impacts of climate
change, especially droughts, flooding and environmental damage from deforestation and
soil degradation.
5 Benin is the 16th most vulnerable country to climate change and ranks 133
of 182 countries in terms of its readiness to adapt to climate change.
6
5. Food insecurity has increased over the past years. According to cadre harmonisé
projections,
7 an estimated 547,422 Beninese faced crisis or emergency levels of food
insecurity (Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) phase 3 or 4) between
March and May 2023, and 1,870,025 were experiencing food security stress (IPC phase 2).
This represents a sharp deterioration compared to the same period in 2019,
8 when an
estimated 31,606 people were in IPC phase 3 and 1,323,799 were in IPC phase 2. In 2021,
82.6 percent of households were unable to afford a healthy diet.
9 Meanwhile, stunting levels
are above the average for West Africa: 31.3 percent of children were stunted in 2020 and
5 percent suffered from wasting.10
1 World Bank. 2022. Rural population (% of total population) - Benin.
2
Ibid.
3 United Nations. 2021 Bilan commun pays.
4
Ibid.
5
International Fund for Agricultural Development. Benin country profile; African Development Bank Group. Benin country
profile.
6 Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative. ND-GAIN country index – Benin.
7 Cadre harmonisé. 2023. Cadre Harmonisé d'identification des zones à risque et des populations en insécurité alimentaire et
nutritionnelle au Sahel, en Afrique de l'Ouest et au Cameroun: Résultats de l'analyse de l'insécurité alimentaire et nutritionnelle
aiguë courante en mars-mai 2023 et projetée en juin-août 2023.
8 Cadre Harmonisé. 2019. Cadre Harmonisé d'identification des zones à risque et des populations en insécurité alimentaire et
nutritionnelle au Sahel, en Afrique de l'Ouest et au Cameroun: Situation courante (mars-mai 2018) et projetée (juin-août 2019).
9 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and others. 2023. The State of Food and Nutrition Security in the
World, 2023. Urbanization, agrifood systems transformation and healthy diets across the rural-urban continuum.
10 Ibid.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 4
6. Benin ranked 166 of 191 countries in the 2022 Human Development Index and 147 of
173 countries in the 2020 Human Capital Index. Primary education is compulsory and free
for all children aged 6–11. Although education is free until ninth grade for girls and boys,
girls do not always have the same educational opportunities. In 2021, literacy rates were
35 percent for women compared to 57 percent for men.
11 In some parts of the country, girls
receive no formal education12 and in general, girls are more likely than boys to drop out
before finishing primary school education. Primary school completion rates dropped from
81 percent in 2016 (76 percent for girls and 85 percent for boys) to 62 percent in 2020
(59 percent for girls and 65 percent for boys), before picking up to 73 percent in 2021
(70 percent for girls and 77 percent for boys).
13
7. The national school feeding programme is one of the Government’s main social protection
programmes. The Government has made a strong political commitment to support
universal school feeding: more than USD 200 million is planned to be allocated by the
Government for a five-year cycle. Investment in school feeding is deemed effective because
in Benin, it yields an estimated return of USD 5 for every dollar invested.
14 Benin’s school
feeding programme is a model in the region. A project to develop a national law on school
feeding has recently been adopted by the Government and will be submitted to the
parliament.
8. While the primary objective of the national school feeding programme is to reduce school
dropouts and improve primary school attendance and completion rates, it also aims to
contribute to the country's economic and social development. The programme has several
intermediate effects: the abandonment of harmful practices such as illicit work and early
marriage; the adoption of good hygiene, health and nutrition practices; and local ownership
and management of the canteens, including the supply of food by small-scale producers.
The expected effects are wider, not only on education but also on social issues including
social cohesion and economic issues such as agricultural value chains, nutrition-sensitive
practices and access for smallholder farmers to stable and institutional markets.
9. Benin ranked 138 of 148 countries in terms of gender equality in 2022. Gender gaps were
narrower in health, survival and educational attainment than in political empowerment and
economic participation.
15 As a result women, girls and other marginalized population groups
are likely to experience disproportionately high barriers to food security. Persons with
disabilities are disproportionally affected by food insecurity, a situation compounded by
minimal social protection provision.
1.2 Progress towards the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
10. In 2022, Benin ranked 153 of 163 countries in terms of its progress towards the SDGs and is
halfway towards achieving the goals, with an index score of 50.7 out of 100.
16 Progress is
positive towards SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth), SDG 12 (responsible
consumption and production) and SDG 13 (climate action).
17 By contrast, progress is slow
on SDG 9 (industry, innovation and infrastructure), SDG 14 (life below water) and SDG 16
11 World Bank. 2021. Literacy rate, adult female (% of females ages 15 and above) – Benin.
12 United States Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor. 2020. Country report on human rights
practices for 2020: Benin 2020 Human Rights Report.
13 World Bank. 2021. Primary completion rate, total (% of relevant age group) – Benin.
14 Government of Benin, WFP and MasterCard Foundation. 2019. Programme d'alimentation scolaire du Bénin: Analyse
Coût-Bénéfice.
15 World Economic Forum. 2022. Global Gender Gap Report 2022.
16 United Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network. 2022. Benin Sustainable Development Report 2022. The SDG
Index is an assessment of each country’s overall performance on the 17 SDGs; equal weight is given to each goal.
17 United Nations Regional Information Centre for Western Europe. Web page on SDG 13.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 5
(peace, justice and strong institutions).
18 For the following nine SDGs, gains appear to have
been reversed: SDG 1 (no poverty), SDG 2 (zero hunger), SDG 3 (good health and well-being),
SDG 4 (quality education), SDG 5 (gender equality), SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation),
SDG 11 (sustainable cities and communities), SDG 15 (life on land) and SDG 17 (partnerships
for the goals).
19
1.3 Progress towards Sustainable Development Goals 2 and 17
Progress on Sustainable Development Goal 2 targets
11. Access to food. While physical access to markets is relatively easy,
20 financial access is an
issue for 50.3 percent of households.21 Food prices have increased due to the compounded
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the Ukraine conflict, limiting households’ economic
access to food. About 46 percent of households cite the increase in food prices as a shock
that has impacted them.
22
12. End malnutrition. The rollout of the national protocol for the management of acute
malnutrition in 201123 contributed to the decline in the combined infant-and-child mortality
rate from 125 per 1,000 live births in 2006 to 96 per 1,000 in 2018.
24 However, undernutrition
persists and 19.7 percent of children under 5 are underweight.
25 The proportion of stunted
children under 5 decreased slightly from 33.8 percent in 2012 to 31.3 percent in 2020.
Wasting levels have remained unchanged at 5 percent of children in 2018 and 2020.
26
13. Anaemia has become more prevalent, affecting 72 percent of children aged 6–59 months in
2018 (up from 58 percent in 2012) and 58 percent of women and girls aged 15–49 years (up
from 41 percent in 2012).27 However, some progress has been made towards achieving the
exclusive breastfeeding targets: 42 percent of infants aged 0–6 months were exclusively
breastfed in 2018,
28 up from 33 percent in 2012.
29
14. Smallholder productivity and income. Smallholder farmers are responsible for 90 percent of
national production even though they farm no more than 10 percent of the total arable
land.
30 In 2021, 28 percent of all employment was in the agriculture sector.
31
18 United Nations. 2021 Bilan commun pays.
19 Ibid.
20 WFP. 2018. National strategic review “Zero hunger” in Benin to 2030.
21 Government of Benin and WFP. 2022. Benin: Analyse globale de la vulnérabilité, de la sécurité alimentaire et de la nutrition.
22 Ibid.
23 Government of Benin. 2011. Protocole national de prise en charge de la malnutrition aiguë.
24 Government of Benin. 2019. Enquête Démographique et de santé 2017–2018.
25 Ibid.
26 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and others. 2022. The State of Food and Nutrition Security in the
World, 2022. Repurposing food and agricultural policies to make healthy diets more affordable.
27 Government of Benin. 2019. Enquête Démographique et de santé 2017–2018 and Government of Benin. 2013. Enquête
Démographique et de santé 2011–2012.
28 Government of Benin. 2019. Enquête Démographique et de santé 2017–2018.
29 Government of Benin. 2013. Enquête Démographique et de santé 2011–2012.
30 United States Department of Agriculture. 2014. Agricultural situation report – Benin.
31 World Bank. 2021. Employment in agriculture (% of total employment) (modeled ILO estimate) – Benin. 
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 6
15. Women perform between 60 and 80 percent of agricultural work and 44 percent of the work
necessary to feed their families.
32 Nonetheless, discrimination against women persists in
land ownership and succession rights, affecting their capacity to participate effectively in
food security programming.
16. Sustainable food system. Although Benin is striving to diversify its agricultural production, its
economy is still underpinned by subsistence agriculture. Intense and successive periods of
drought and floods could affect food security by reducing water resources by up to
60 percent and food production by 6 percent by 2025 if adaptive measures,33 such as more
resilient crops and improved irrigation, are not effective. In addition, Benin has high levels
of dry post-harvest losses: 16.8 percent for maize, 13.6 percent for rice and 10.5 percent for
sorghum.34
17. Sixty percent of smallholder farmers cite climate-related challenges as a threat to their
production.35 Localized droughts and floods already affect thousands of people in the north
(Malanville and Karimama) and south (Oueme, Mono and Couffo), pushing the agriculture
sector to implement adaptive measures.
36 By 2030, the impacts of climate change could
reduce corn yields by 21.6 percent and cotton yields by 0.9 percent.37
Progress on Sustainable Development Goal 17 targets
18. Capacity strengthening. WFP and other United Nations entities support the Government with
continuous monitoring of food security38 and implementation of the nationwide analysis of
vulnerability to food insecurity and malnutrition.
39 The Government has called on WFP to
implement the national school feeding programme, with the specific mandate of building
the capacity of national partners in preparation for the future transfer of operations
management.
19. Enhanced global partnership. The Government of Benin is a member of the global School
Meals Coalition and the President of Benin has been appointed as a champion of the
coalition. South–South and triangular cooperation partnerships have been catalytic in
strengthening national capacities and empowering young people, women and small
businesses and driving innovation.
20. Diversified resourcing. In 2021, the Government carried out the first international bond issue
dedicated to the financing of the SDGs and mobilized EUR 500 million. This operation, the
first of its kind in Africa, marks the Government’s commitment to achieving the SDGs.
1.4 Hunger gaps and challenges
21. Although food and nutrition security is a key policy priority outlined in a variety of policy
documents and strategic plans, gains have been marginal. This underperformance is linked
to a lack of resources and fragmented implementation, including insufficient coordination
between institutions and inadequate coherence among stakeholder programmes.
32 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Fact sheet: Benin – Women, agriculture and rural development:
Role of women in agriculture.
33 Government of the Netherlands. 2018. Climate Change Profile, Benin.
34 African Postharvest Losses Information System. Dry weight loss: Benin - All crops - All years.
35 Government of Benin and WFP. 2022. Benin: Analyse globale de la vulnérabilité, de la sécurité alimentaire et de la nutrition.
36 Government of the Netherlands. 2018. Climate Change Profile: Benin.
37 Government of Benin. 2022. Plan national d'adaptation aux changements climatiques du Bénin.
38 Through the Cadre harmonisé d’identification des zones à risque et d’estimation des populations vulnérables au Sahel et en
Afrique de l’Ouest.
39 Government of Benin and WFP. 2022. Benin: Analyse globale de la vulnérabilité, de la sécurité alimentaire et de la nutrition.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 7
22. Poor access to nutritious food is more a function of nutrition habits and the inadequate
purchasing power of the most vulnerable people than a lack of food availability. The national
poverty rate is 38.5 percent, with persistent disparities between rural and urban areas. In
early 2023, 18.8 percent of the population were affected by food insecurity (IPC phases 2 to
4); 4.2 percent were severely food insecure (IPC phases 3 and 4).
40 Almost 83 percent of
households are unable to afford a healthy diet and would therefore be gravely impacted in
the event of further price rises.
41
23. The food systems analysis42 confirms that food and nutrition insecurity risks are linked to
an unequal distribution of assets and inadequate access to natural resources, education
and employment opportunities, particularly for women and girls. The analysis underscores
the importance of addressing food security and nutrition through a food systems approach
and highlights the linkages between supply chains, food environments, consumer behaviour
and economic and social institutions that are connected to food. Further research is needed
to support adequate action.43
24. Progress has stalled on achieving food and nutrition security44 due to a combination of
factors such as inadequate purchasing power, insufficient access to nutritious diets and
clean water, the impacts of climate change and damage to ecological systems, insufficient
access to nutrition and health information and services, unmet needs for training and
innovation, limited opportunities linked to land and credit for women farmers, poor market
access for smallholder farmers, suboptimal management of agricultural production
(post-harvest losses and low transformation), poor resilience of vulnerable households and
communities to climate change, increasingly violent extremism and gender-based violence.
The effects of COVID-19 crisis, the Ukraine conflict and recent global food and energy price
inflation have compounded the situation.
25. Non-contributory social protection is still at the early stages of development. The “ARCH”
human capital insurance scheme is one of the flagship programmes designed and
implemented by the Government since 2016 to support vulnerable populations and
guarantee social protection. The national school feeding programme is also embedded in
the social protection system.
2. Strategic implications for WFP
2.1 Achievements, lessons learned and strategic changes for WFP
26. As confirmed by the preliminary findings of the evaluation of the country strategic plan (CSP)
for 2019–2023, WFP’s strategic orientation in Benin is rooted in real needs, notably building
human capital through the implementation of national school feeding programme.
27. Under the CSP for 2019–2023, WFP has supported inclusive and high-quality education while
building government capacity. WFP has been selected as a privileged government partner
based on its expertise and comparative advantage. Its contribution to school feeding and
related capacity was confirmed in the findings from the final joint evaluation of the national
school feeding programme and the CSP evaluation. The coverage of national school feeding
40Cadre harmonisé. 2023. Cadre Harmonisé d'identification des zones à risque et des populations en insécurité alimentaire et
nutritionnelle au Sahel, en Afrique de l'Ouest et au Cameroun: Résultats de l'analyse de l'insécurité alimentaire et nutritionnelle
aiguë courante en mars-mai 2023 et projetée en juin-août 2023.
41 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and others. 2022. The State of Food and Nutrition Security in the
World, 2022. Repurposing food and agricultural policies to make healthy diets more affordable.
42 Government of Benin and WFP. 2022. Benin: Analyse globale de la vulnérabilité, de la sécurité alimentaire et de la nutrition.
43 Ibid.
44 WFP. 2018. National strategic review “Zero hunger” in Benin to 2030.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 8
programme has been expanded to 75 percent of all public primary schools and most of the
results expected were achieved, particularly in terms of improved enrolment, attendance
and retention rates. However, the potential for local purchases from small-scale producers
has not been fully exploited. Opportunities to support the local economy and harness the
“greening” potential could be seized to maximize the impacts of national school feeding
programme beyond educational and social security outcomes.
28. The CSP evaluation assessed WFP’s support to the Government in addressing the root
causes of food and nutrition insecurity as limited. While the evaluators considered WFP’s
nutrition and emergency response strategic outcomes to be relevant, underfunding and
other factors were found to have prevented WFP from making a broader contribution and
limited its perceived added value. The need for a stronger focus on anticipatory and
preparedness measures and technical assistance to strengthen government capacity in
emergency preparedness and response at the central and local levels has been identified as
very important. A diversification of transfer modalities through the integration of cash could
render assistance more efficient and meaningful.
29. A handover road map was developed in 2018 but has proven to be rather prescriptive,
insufficiently aligned with the workings of local public management and administration and
based on inadequate consideration of stakeholder incentive structures. Learning from that
experience, WFP is now adopting new approaches to strengthening country capacity and
national systems that focus on addressing problems and adapting solutions through an
iterative process. Starting in early 2022, WFP engaged differently with the Government by
positioning itself as a facilitator and convenor instead of providing ready-to-use solutions.
In this new role, it aims to foster change through a co-creation process and a test-and-learn
approach.
30. In terms of strategic shift, the school feeding component will remain central to WFP’s
portfolio and will be used as an entry point to all other components. WFP will also promote
the development of a nutrition-sensitive food system and the local economy in order to
increase the resilience and social cohesion of communities. The home-grown element of the
national school feeding programme will be a focus area. WFP will support national
emergency preparedness and response capacity, while retaining its readiness to provide
direct support when necessary. Nutrition will be integrated in all interventions along with
protection, accountability to affected populations, disability and inclusion, gender equality
and women's empowerment, access to clean energy services and environmental
sustainability.
2.2 Alignment with national development plans, the United Nations sustainable
development cooperation framework and other frameworks:
31. The CSP is aligned with the United Nations sustainable development cooperation framework
(UNSDCF) for 2023–2026 and the Government’s national action plan. The national school
feeding policy sets the strategic orientation for the school feeding component of the CSP. In
addition, the CSP is aligned with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities, which was ratified by Benin in 2012, and the act on national promotion and
protection of the rights of persons with disabilities. The CSP is aligned with the second and
third pillars of the Government’s national action plan and with UNSDCF outcomes 1 and 2.
It also reflects the African Union’s Agenda 2063, which calls for the pursuit of climate-smart
agriculture and food security.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 9
2.3 Engagement with key stakeholders
32. WFP will facilitate responsible and accountable partnerships for strengthening national
capacity, striving to ensure that policies and actions are coherent and encouraging
multi-stakeholder participation in order to contribute to achieving zero hunger and
strengthening emergency preparedness and response, social protection and food systems.
33. The CSP builds on ongoing partnerships and programmes and regular discussions held
within the United Nations system and with government ministries and various organizations
including civil society organizations and foundations. WFP continues to focus on providing
technical assistance and enabling government-led change. The country office has compiled
data, analysis and expert outputs to guide prioritization and has consulted with ministries,
universities, private sector actors, donors and development partners. In addition, within the
framework of the preparation of the UNSDCF, the country office participated in formal
consultations and held informal consultations with organizations for people with disabilities,
women’s civil society organizations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
representing marginalized groups to consider their needs and concerns. Memoranda of
understanding and action plans signed with various stakeholders will be maintained.
34. WFP will continue to facilitate South–South and triangular cooperation to support the
Government in skills enhancement and the sharing of systems and lessons learned,
including through WFP’s centres of excellence.
3. WFP strategic portfolio
3.1 Direction, focus and intended impacts
35. WFP will adopt an approach based on the humanitarian–development–peace nexus, taking
school feeding as entry point to ensure coherent, complementary and integrated
interventions that help to meet essential needs while seeking to address the root causes of
vulnerability in order to accelerate progress towards the SDGs, particularly SDG 2, and to
make strong contributions to SDGs 1, 4, 5, 16 and 17, thereby supporting the protection and
development of Benin’s human, social and economic capital.
36. Through the CSP, WFP aims primarily at assisting the Government in the following three
ways:
➢ Strengthen national institutions and local actors in emergency preparedness,
planning and response, including anticipatory action and recovery. In case of crisis,
WFP will provide assistance to those affected to meet their direct and immediate
essential needs.
➢ Ensure that all schoolchildren benefit from healthy and nutritious meals by extending
the school feeding programme to cover all public primary schools. Furthermore, WFP
will use its nutrition-sensitive, sustainable and integrated approach to foster good
nutrition and hygiene practices. WFP will also contribute to building the capacity of
targeted food value chain actors, particularly smallholder farmers, to ensure more
diversified and nutritious school meals and to contribute to sustainable local food
systems.
➢ Provide technical assistance to strengthen government capacity in order to facilitate
national ownership of school feeding operations through a co-design process. 
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 10
3.2 Country strategic plan outcomes, WFP strategic outcomes, focus areas, expected
outputs and key activities
Country strategic plan outcome 1: People affected by shocks in Benin can meet urgent food and
nutrition needs before, during and after shocks, by 2027
37. WFP will provide technical assistance and capacity strengthening to targeted national
institutions and local actors to anticipate, prevent, mitigate, prepare for and respond to
shocks in a gender-responsive and inclusive manner.
38. WFP will be ready to provide food and nutrition assistance to people in urgent need by
delivering rapid, cost-effective and accessible assistance where and when it is required,
based on humanitarian principles and corporate and national targeting criteria that ensure
an inclusive and equitable response. WFP will utilize cash and in-kind modalities to address
immediate food and nutrition needs, considering the circumstances and reflecting the
needs and dietary preferences of affected populations and ensuring the nutritional
adequacy of the food basket. The response will be coordinated with and complementary to
national emergency response systems to avoid delays and overlaps. It will also build on
existing functional social protection systems, supporting a shock-responsive and
nutrition‑sensitive approach.
WFP strategic outcome
39. CSP outcome 1 is aligned with WFP strategic outcome 1: People are better able to meet their
urgent food and nutrition needs.
Focus area
40. The focus area of CSP outcome 1 is crisis response.
Alignment with national priorities
41. CSP outcome 1 is aligned with the third pillar of the Government’s national action plan and
contributes to UNSDCF outcome 1.
Expected outputs
42. The following output will contribute to the achievement of CSP outcome 1:
➢ Output 1.1: Food-insecure people affected by shocks receive assistance that meets
their direct food and nutrition needs and benefit from the strengthened capacity of
targeted national institutions and local actors to prevent, mitigate and respond to
shocks.
Key activities
Activity 1: Provide food and nutrition assistance to shock-affected people, including school-children, to
meet their needs and technical assistance to national institutions and local actors to strengthen their
emergency preparedness and response capacities
43. WFP will work with and strengthen the capacity of national counterparts, particularly the
national agency for civil protection and the technical cell in charge of monitoring and
managing food security and in consultation with all relevant partners in order to improve
coordination and responsiveness to shocks.
44. WFP will strengthen engagement with the Ministry of Social Affairs and Microfinance with a
particular attention to adaptative, nutrition-sensitive and gender-responsive social
protection and will strengthen institutional capacity related to food and nutrition security
monitoring and analysis to inform emergency preparedness and response. Finally, WFP will
leverage its comparative advantage in introducing innovation and digital solutions.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 11
45. In the event of shocks and when needed, WFP will provide direct food and nutrition
assistance to shock affected and vulnerable people. Transfer modalities will be chosen with
consideration of context, feasibility and protection concerns. Targeting will be based on the
national social protection scheme and vulnerability criteria related to shocks, food security
and nutrition. WFP will advocate and prioritize the provision of life-saving support to poor
and shock-affected women and girls. In collaboration with communities, WFP will use an
inclusive approach that addresses accountability and protection issues and reflects
differences linked to disability, gender and age while mitigating risks related to inclusion and
exclusion and conflict sensitivity. The timing and duration of support may vary based on the
severity of the shock.
Partnerships
46. WFP will coordinate with partners at the national and regional levels and with government
technical services. The organization will implement anticipatory action and emergency
response in close collaboration with the local focal points of the Government’s national civil
protection and social protection agencies. To ensure that nutrition requirements are met,
WFP will also leverage its ongoing partnerships with the Ministry of Health and the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). As the agency lead of the emergency group, WFP
will lead the food security working group and will seek out synergies with partners’
interventions.
Assumptions
47. Government cooperation in targeting and resource mobilization is a prerequisite to the
achievement of CSP outcome 1. WFP will be able to contribute to this outcome provided that
a network of reliable cooperating partners and financial service providers remains active in
targeted areas and that these areas continue to be accessible, especially in the north.
Transition/handover strategy
48. WFP will prioritize the transfer of technical knowledge, skills and systems to national
counterparts at the central and local levels to ensure that emergency preparedness and
response along with shock-responsive social protection are managed adequately and
autonomously.
Country strategic plan outcome 2: School-age children and communities in Benin have access to
affordable, nutritious diets and basic social services as a result of the leveraging of the school
feeding programme as an entry point for the achievement of enhanced nutrition, health and
education outcomes, by 2027
49. WFP will continue to support the Government in ensuring increased access to good quality
education through the expansion of the national school feeding programme and improved,
more widespread access to nutritious foods to further contribute to the protection and
development of Benin’s human capital. While the primary objective of the national school
feeding programme is to reduce school dropouts and improve primary school completion
rates, it can also contribute to the country’s economic and social development.
50. Complementing activities under CSP outcome 1, WFP will ensure that a shock-sensitive
approach is taken to school feeding. This should allow the programme to be adapted to
evolving circumstances, ensuring the adequacy of the response, especially for people and
communities who face climate hazards and regional security challenges, particularly in the
north of the country. 
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 12
51. Considering the evolving security situation in the north, the school feeding platform will also
play an important role in fostering stability and peace. The continuity of the school meals
services provides a sense of normality and stability for the future and enhances the
legitimacy and visible presence and role of the State. It plays an important protective role
by helping to keep children in schools who might otherwise be at risk of early marriage,
gender-based violence or recruitment into armed groups. It contributes to strengthening
social cohesion by mobilizing the community around the project. The contribution of local
procurement to smallholder farmers’ livelihoods can also reduce the economic drivers of
conflict.
52. WFP will take into consideration and advocate embedding disability and inclusion, child
protection and gender equality principles in the school feeding programme. WFP will also
include climate-sensitive measures in the operationalization of school feeding and will use
schools as an entry point for building social cohesion.
WFP strategic outcome
53. CSP outcome 2 is aligned with WFP strategic outcome 2: People have better nutrition, health,
and education outcomes.
Focus area
54. The focus area of CSP outcome 2 is root causes.
Alignment with national priorities
55. CSP outcome 2 contributes to UNSDCF outcome 2 and is aligned with the second and third
pillars of the Government’s national action plan.
Expected outputs
56. The following outputs will contribute to the achievement of CSP outcome 2:
➢ Output 2.1: Schoolchildren benefit from nutritious and healthy meals every school day
and are trained along with their communities in good nutrition and hygiene practices
and climate-sensitive measures.
➢ Output 3.1: Targeted food value chain actors, including smallholder farmers, benefit
from climate-smart services and capacity building that increase their resilience and
facilitate their access to markets, especially markets connected to school feeding.
Key activities
Activity 2: Provide nutritious school meals to schoolchildren through an integrated and inclusive
programme that benefits the community
57. As the Government’s partner of choice, WFP has been entrusted with supporting national
efforts to achieve 100 percent of coverage of schools by the school feeding programme by
the end of 2026. Most of the remaining canteens to be covered are located in urban and
peri-urban areas. Consistent with activity 3 and in line with WFP's local and regional food
procurement policy, WFP will promote purchases from smallholders, in particular women,
to improve the availability of nutritious foods in schools. WFP plans to increase the use of
cash transfers to schools and to continue its work with school canteen management
committees, promoting leadership roles for women, in order to progressively develop their
capacity to manage local procurement independently, thereby strengthening community
management of school feeding. Finally, based on lessons learned from the implementation
of the CSP for 2019–2023 related to supply chain constraints and challenges, WFP will
strengthen its work on developing sustainable, efficient and effective supply chain models
that can be transferred to the Government in the medium term. This will include the use of
innovative and digital solutions that connect communities to economic opportunities.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 13
58. WFP will use the results and recommendations of the Fill the Nutrient Gap analysis
conducted in 2023 to adapt the school menus, which will in turn influence procurement
approaches by putting more emphasis on fresh and diversified locally produced foods for
better health and nutrition outcomes. Furthermore, WFP will analyse several different
approaches, including in terms of cost–benefit, to increase the nutritional value of school
meals through food diversification and food fortification.
59. WFP will implement capacity strengthening and social and behaviour change
communication activities with parents’ associations, schoolchildren, school feeding
committees, teachers and cooks in order to promote good nutrition practices. This work will
include support for nutrition surveillance, food safety, deworming and vaccination
campaigns. Capacity strengthening will also be aimed at promoting gender equality and
minimum protection standards that seek to develop a safe and empowering school
environment for children, especially girls. In collaboration with partners, WFP will promote
equitable and meaningful engagement with beneficiaries for the improvement of food
storage and preparation, infrastructure and water, sanitation and hygiene facilities to
ensure these respond to the needs of women, men, girls and boys, while ensuring sanitary
food preparation conditions and paying attention to energy conservation and
environmental sustainability.
60. WFP will work with local NGOs to mobilize community support for the development of
school gardens for pedagogical purposes, nutrition education and community and civic
engagement.
Activity 3: Provide technical assistance to targeted food value chain actors to improve the availability of
locally produced nutritious food products, especially for school canteens
61. The main objective of this activity is to improve the availability of locally produced and
nutritious food products for school feeding, while contributing to improvements in the
development of local nutrition-sensitive value chains, income streams and the food and
nutrition security of the local community, especially women smallholder farmers.
62. WFP will build on the existing national structures related to key value chains and work with
technical services, particularly extension services at the department and commune levels
that provide direct support to smallholder farmer organizations and other actors.
Processing, aggregation and delivery systems in support of local procurement will be
important entry points. Special attention will be given to short food supply chains and the
nutrition quality of food. WFP will leverage its presence throughout the country, its
recognized expertise and experience in supply chain management and its network and
innovation capacity to source, support and scale up high-potential solutions that will not
only allow the handover of a sustainable school feeding model to the Government but also
contribute to the economic empowerment of key actors along the value chain.
63. WFP will work with at least 100 small farmer organizations, representing no less than
9,000 farmers, and decentralized public institutions to support nutrition-sensitive value
chains for crops such as maize, rice, cassava, beans, cotton seed oil and vegetables.
Furthermore, WFP will promote the enhancement of smallholder farmers’ knowledge of
agricultural, post-harvest and supply chain management best practices and their access to
markets, especially institutional markets such as the national school feeding programme.
When feasible, WFP will prioritize capacity strengthening for women who are active in local
food systems as they play an important role in food production and processing and can
provide food to school canteens.
64. WFP will work on strengthening inclusive and nutrition-sensitive value chains to better
impact nutrition by working with men and women along the chains to improve sustainability,
including through food diversification and fortification. WFP plans to strengthen the capacity 
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 14
of industrial and semi-industrial food producers, food processor units and others involved
in fortifying food products, including cereals, oil and salt, using advocacy, training and the
provision of technical and advisory services. WFP will furthermore pursue advocacy and
policy advice in support of sustainable and inclusive food systems.
Partnerships
65. WFP will continue building coalitions for sustainable results by playing a convenor role and
will support the ministries responsible for agriculture, health, education and social affairs,
and community organizations. The partnership with the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock
and Fisheries is particularly critical to increasing the share of local procurement and its
impact on the economy. Engagement with other United Nations entities, technical and
financial partners, the private sector, foundations, NGOs and knowledge partners will be
vital for the implementation of the proposed activities and will ensure that local production
increases to cover the requirements of the school feeding programme.
66. This work will build on and extend existing partnerships including with the other Romebased agencies, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UNICEF, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Capital Development Fund and international
foundations to cover complementary services, foster more resilience in local food chains
and harness positive collateral effects in terms of job creation, women’s empowerment and
economic growth. WFP will also create and sustain linkages with similar and complementary
interventions led by other development partners in the fields of nutrition and access to
energy and water.
67. WFP will continue its engagement on South–South and triangular cooperation, leveraging its
centres of excellence. WFP will also work towards mobilizing the expertise of emerging
countries that have had successful experiences in school feeding, rural development and
sustainable farming.
Assumptions
68. WFP will be able to contribute effectively to the achievement of this CSP outcome provided
that a network of reliable cooperating partners remains active in targeted areas and that
these areas remain accessible. Success will also depend on the support and investment in
value chain components by the Government and partners. It will also depend on the
implementation of the new co-designed and decentralized supply chain model for national
school feeding programme under activity 4.
Transition/handover strategy
69. The full handover of operations to the Government will occur beyond the timeframe of this
CSP. Meanwhile, WFP will continue to support the Government in the development and
implementation of the national school feeding model. A technical group has been set up to
examine the supply chain building block of school feeding under the lead of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. Once local procurement is institutionalized and
targeted organizations have acquired sufficient capacity and experience in supplying the
national school feeding programme, WFP will share the model as part of the work carried
under activity 4 and encourage its adoption by the Government.
Country strategic plan outcome 3: Targeted institutions and systems in Benin have strengthened
capacity to implement school feeding and other inclusive programmes to promote food security
and nutrition, by 2027
70. WFP will be mainly supporting the Government through institutional and legal framework
and policy development, capacity strengthening, and knowledge management and transfer.
A co-design process to develop a nationally owned school feeding model is ongoing and will
constitute a central element of the transition process.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 15
WFP strategic outcome
71. CSP outcome 3 is aligned with WFP strategic outcome 4: National programmes and systems
are strengthened.
Focus area
72. The focus area of CSP outcome 3 is root causes.
Alignment with national priorities
73. Interventions under this CSP outcome focus on root causes and seek to build the long-term
capacity of national and regional institutions to take full ownership and management of the
national school feeding programme. This CSP outcome is aligned with the third pillar of the
Government's national action plan and UNSDCF outcome 2.
Expected outputs
74. The following output will contribute to the achievement of CSP outcome 3:
➢ Output 4.1: School-age children and communities benefit from the strengthened capacity
of the systems and institutions of the national integrated nutrition-sensitive school feeding
programme and the operationalization and gradual transition of the programme to
national authorities.
Key activities
Activity 4: Provide technical assistance to national institutions to enable them gradually to take
operational ownership of the national school feeding programme
75. To ensure full national ownership and the sustainability of the school feeding programme,
it is envisioned that the implementation of the programme will be gradually transferred
from WFP to the Government. WFP will work jointly with the Government to identify
questions and scenarios that pertain to how the national system can take over the school
feeding programme. For this purpose, WFP will support and facilitate a process through
which the Government and WFP can identify bottlenecks together then co-design solutions
to address them. An iterative approach will allow government institutions to identify a model
that is both technically correct and administratively feasible. At the same time, WFP will
continue its support for the development of an equitable and inclusive institutional, legal
and governance framework for school feeding in Benin.
76. WFP will work under the lead of a coalition of six ministries and agencies, supported by all
partners involved, to develop a national implementation model that is suitable for Benin.
Efforts to strengthen operational capacity will be an integral part of this. The work will be
structured under the six building blocks that have been co-identified and validated by the
coalition with a view to ensuring equitability and inclusivity. The building blocks cover food
procurement and supply chain; meal management; financing and administration;
monitoring and accountability; community organization; and infrastructure. WFP will also
support evidence generation, analysis, knowledge management and sharing, and advocacy
as part of the transition. A continuous assessment of national systems will be carried out,
including through the Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) exercise.
77. WFP will continue to refer to the national capacity strengthening plan for 2022–2026, which
was approved by the Government in 2022. WFP will support the Government in the
development of a national school feeding law, jointly with other partners. WFP will advocate
sectoral and intersectoral policies and operational synergies that integrate in the school
feeding model the different needs, experience and priorities of the people of Benin within
complementary sectors such as agriculture, health and nutrition while supporting links with 
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 16
the broader social protection framework. In addition, WFP will engage with decentralized
authorities to increase local ownership of school feeding.
Partnerships
78. While collaborating with all relevant stakeholders for the implementation of the proposed
activities, WFP will work in close coordination with the ministries involved in the handover
of the national school feeding programme to the Government of Benin including those
responsible for education, agriculture and finance, and the presidential education unit
(cellule présidentielle de l’éducation). To ensure a full cross-sectoral approach, the ministries
in charge of health, social affairs, local governance, and development and the coordination
of government action will be other key partners with which a sustained engagement will be
essential to cover complementary services and foster local-level community organization.
Collaboration with the WFP centres of excellence in Brazil and Côte d’Ivoire and work
through the School Meals Coalition will also ensure adequate support for the development
of the school feeding policy and legal framework, the identification of sustainable financing
options and the generation of evidence for the development of the national model.
79. The country office also plans to increase its engagement with other United Nations entities
and local knowledge multipliers such as the national institute for training and research in
education, universities, and research and innovation bodies.
Assumptions
80. WFP will be able to contribute effectively to the achievement of CSP outcome 3 provided
that the Government continues to invest in capacity strengthening efforts, complementing
WFP’s contributions with its own resources. General political stability and normal staff
turnover in institutions are also assumed. Finally, the adoption of an institutional framework
will be essential in the handover and transition process.
Transition/handover strategy
81. Activity 4 under this CSP outcome is a significant part of the transition strategy for the
national school feeding programme. A sustainable, efficient and effective model will be
co-developed by strengthening country capacity, co-designing national systems,
strengthening the operational capacity of relevant institutions and supporting the enabling
environment for a gradual transition to full ownership and management of the national
school feeding programme by the Government. The co-designing process will build on the
lessons learned, good practices from implementation and relevant evidence. All pilots and
operational improvements in the WFP model will be tested under the national model before
their potential scale-up is considered to maximize chances for success and sustainability.
The socioeconomic situation and the duration of policy change and the gradual handover
of the national school feeding programme to the Government will influence the duration of
the required support.
4. Implementation arrangements
4.1 Beneficiary analysis
82. Children are the primary focus of WFP’s activities in Benin. Two million primary
schoolchildren will be covered by the national school feeding programme by 2026.
Beneficiary numbers for activity 2 are designed to match school enrolment data projections
for Benin and will be adjusted as needed based on official data.
83. The projected numbers of beneficiaries for activity 1 are based on the country office’s
experience during floods since 2019 and take into account the fragility of the northern
regions. The WFP country office will integrate protection and accountability to affected 
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 17
populations in all its operations to ensure that the assistance provided is safe, appropriate
and received in a dignified manner.
84. Beneficiaries of capacity strengthening under activity 2 and of social and behaviour change
communication initiatives under activity 3 will be prioritized where possible for home-grown
school feeding (HGSF), as described in activity 3.
85. Capacity strengthening will be provided under CSP outcome 3, benefiting public institutions
linked to the national school feeding programme. It will complement capacity strengthening
efforts implemented under each activity in relation to emergency preparedness and
response, social protection and local and community organizations.
4.2 Transfers
86. WFP’s primary transfer modality for school feeding will be food. WFP will provide primary
schoolchildren with in-kind meals that cover most of their daily nutritional requirements and
reflect local food habits. Further to this, WFP plans to increase the use of CBT as a transfer
modality for schools from 2.5 percent of assistance in 2024 to 10.5 percent in 2027 as a way
of supporting local purchases and nutrition under activity 2. Support for food value chains
through HGSF will be complemented by technical assistance, training and equipment for
food fortification and post-harvest loss reduction in order to improve food quality and
strengthen market access.
87. WFP will work with financial service providers to deliver cash assistance. WFP will also train
school committees and organize meetings with local community leaders to ensure proper
implementation.
88. The country office expects to increase the use of CBTs to cover 80 percent of beneficiaries
by the end of the CSP under activity 1, prioritizing households headed by women.
4.3 Country office capacity and profile
89. The country office conducted a strategic workforce review exercise in November 2022.
WFP’s human resource capacity is generally high, but the scale-up and the progressive shifts
related to transfer modalities and capacity strengthening will require an increase in staffing
and an expansion of certain fields of expertise. The review helped to identify the core skills
required to implement the CSP, with a 9 percent increase in staffing between 2022 and 2025
followed by a targeted reduction in the workforce phasing in 2026 and 2027. Key roles
required for the handover of school feeding operations will be retained. WFP acknowledges
that this plan will affect workforce segments differently; among the areas that require
special attention are operations, CBT management, nutrition, supply chain, social
protection, capacity strengthening, digitalization and technology,
45 innovation, partnerships
and data analytics and literacy.
90. WFP is in the process of decentralizing its activities in Benin to the sub-offices. Staffing levels
at the country office will be reinforced in line with required organizational alignments to
ensure adequate capacity, and new provisions for staffing have been accounted for in
budgets.
4.4 Partnerships
91. WFP will cooperate and coordinate with the Government (as the main donor) at the national
and regional levels and will work with local authorities to strengthen their coordination and
planning capacity. The CSP will be implemented under the overall guidance of the Ministry
of Economy and Finance, in collaboration with the ministries in charge of education and a
45 The country office has started the deployment of the “last mile solution” in 2023 and the full rollout is expected to be
finished by August 2023.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 18
range of government institutions including the offices in charge of food security analysis and
response planning; technical ministries in charge of health and nutrition, social protection
and agriculture; and the ministry in charge of coordinating government action.
92. WFP will seek to diversify its donor base, exploring opportunities for partnerships with
international financial institutions and international climate funds (such as the Green
Climate Fund and the Adaptation Fund) to secure long-term and stable resources for the
CSP. WFP will further its evidence-based advocacy towards the international community to
foster greater donor interest for emergency preparedness, response and anticipatory action
in Benin while leveraging its strategic positioning as one of the Government’s partners of
choice.
93. WFP will work on the joint advocacy, design, implementation and monitoring of its activities
with a wide range of local NGOs, especially those that represent groups at risk of
marginalization and vulnerability, farmers’ associations, civil society organizations and local
communities and counterparts. This approach will enable WFP to expand the reach of its
capacity strengthening work and enhance the national ownership of its programmes.
Knowledge partnerships will be central in generating evidence and knowledge to inform
programming and decision-making. WFP will also capitalize on existing South–South
cooperation initiatives and support from its centres of excellence to cover proposed
activities linked to knowledge transfer and technological innovation. The School Meals
Coalition will be also an important platform for strengthening the promotion of local
procurement, HGSF and knowledge exchange to improve the quality and sustainability of
the national school feeding programme.
94. WFP will seek to engage with the private sector on innovative financing, delivery
mechanisms, information and communications technology and enhanced supply chains,
with a particular focus on nutrition.
5. Performance management and evaluation
5.1 Monitoring and evaluation arrangements
95. The CSP monitoring and evaluation system will ensure robust gender-responsive
monitoring and measure programme performance in line with the WFP corporate results
framework. WFP will revise the Benin monitoring strategy during the CSP to enhance
monitoring and evaluation capabilities by improving data quality, ensuring that the system
is gender-inclusive and disability-responsive and developing harmonized monitoring tools.
96. WFP will conduct baseline surveys, assessments and collect qualitative data to measure
progress on outcome, output and cross-cutting indicators. A community feedback
mechanism with a toll-free access number will be set up to identify issues related to
implementation, protection and other matters and ensure accountability. If access to the
programme area is jeopardized, remote monitoring will be carried out using
computer-assisted telephone interviews and third-party monitoring.
97. To support evidence-based policy design and implementation, WFP’s regular monitoring will
be supplemented by gender-sensitive food security and nutrition assessments, which will
incorporate conflict-sensitivity considerations.
98. Gender perspectives will be emphasized during the monitoring and analytical phases to
ensure a balance of inputs from women and men. Monitoring will strive to capture, analyse
and report, by age and gender, the positive and any possible negative impacts of activities
on the lives of women, men, girls and boys and the contribution of WFP’s activities to gender
outcomes. The country office will ensure sufficient gender-responsive monitoring and 
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 19
evaluation capacity, including through the screening of cooperating partners, and gender
and disability disaggregated data reporting will be provided where possible.46
99. WFP will monitor progress towards the results outlined in the plan of action for the national
school feeding programme and related indicators on a quarterly basis. WFP will help
strengthen government tools for developing and using nutrition-sensitive indicators in the
national school feeding programme and will set up gender-responsive monitoring
mechanisms that measure progress towards approved indicators. The new base value for
Benin’s national capacity index for school meals will be established under the SABER
exercise conducted by WFP in 2023.
100. WFP will select and develop indicators and qualitative research approaches to monitor and
assess the progress of the implementation of the national capacity development and the
handover of interventions as well as improvements in sectoral and intersectoral policies
especially in agriculture, social protection, health, nutrition and gender equality.
101. A CSP mid-term review is planned for mid-2025. In 2025, the country office will also conduct
a decentralized evaluation of the school feeding component, jointly with the Government,
and a CSP evaluation will be carried out in the penultimate year of the CSP to generate
evidence, contribute to learning and inform the future direction of programming. WFP will
contribute to the UNSDCF evaluation.
5.2 Risk management
Strategic risks
102. Climate shocks and malnutrition could exacerbate current vulnerabilities, especially in
northern regions. To mitigate this risk, WFP intends to contribute to building long-term
resilience, as well as supporting the Government in establishing effective early warning
systems.
103. Insufficient coordination among line ministries could affect the development of a national
implementation model for the school feeding programme and the handover of the
programme to the Government. To mitigate these risks, WFP will enhance its capacity
building work with the Government to improve coordination and collaboration among
relevant ministries, providing technical inputs, expertise and facilitation.
104. Security issues in the north with slow but persistent encroachments by non-state armed
groups from the central Sahel constitute a threat to Benin and to the implementation of
school feeding and emergency response activities. To mitigate this risk WFP will continue to
monitor the situation very closely and will work with the Government to develop
contingency plans, concept of operations, to ensure continuity in the provision of school
meals through the use of take-home rations and preparation in case of a significant increase
in the number of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Operational risks
105. The quality and reliability of local procurement will depend partly on the involvement and
capacity of school canteen management committees, smallholder farmers’ organizations
and national structures. To mitigate risks related to food safety and local supply chain
failures, WFP will foster linkages between extension services and decentralized government
structures and other partners, train all relevant stakeholders and work closely with partner
NGOs on monitoring.
46 Using the Washington Group Questions to disaggregate data by disability.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 20
106. WFP will strengthen its community feedback mechanisms so that they address gender,
disability and protection challenges, including gender-based violence risks. They will include
both referral and escalation mechanisms and facilitate the use of results to inform
programming, taking an inclusive approach and making sure that the feedback mechanisms
are accessible to the people at greatest risk of being left behind. WFP partners with UNFPA,
organizations that promote women’s rights and the Ministry of Social Affairs and
Microfinance on the prevention of gender-based violence and on raising the awareness of
direct and indirect beneficiaries.
Fiduciary risks
107. The WFP anti-fraud and anti-corruption policy is integrated into legal agreements with
cooperating partners. Some limitations related to the private sector and market structure
could pose the risk of non-compliance with WFP procurement rules and regulations. WFP
will expand its roster of vendors, enhance competitive processes and ensure that potential
suppliers are aware of WFP procurement standards.
108. To address risks of sexual exploitation and abuse, WFP will provide training to employees
and partners, sensitize beneficiaries to this issue and strengthen internal reporting
procedures.
Financial risks
109. Regular food security, market and supply chain assessments and monitoring will be carried
out, and WFP will maintain the flexibility to adjust its activities to mitigate financial risks
related to inflation, funding shortfalls and economic shocks.
5.3 Social and environmental safeguards
110. In line with WFP’s environmental and social safeguards framework, all WFP activities will be
screened with a view to preventing, avoiding or mitigating any potential negative direct or
indirect impacts. Environmental and social plans will be developed on a project basis in
accordance with corporate mandatory safeguard screening. They will reflect commitments
set out in WFP’s policies on climate change, the environment and resilience building for food
security and nutrition and will ensure that fundamental human rights and gender equality
are respected and protected in all WFP activities. Activities will entail the adequate use and
management of natural resources, discouraging practices that are not environmentally
friendly, taking climate-related risks into account, raising awareness of climate change and
including targeted activities that enhance resilience and reduce vulnerability.
6. Resources for results
6.1 Country portfolio budget
111. The country portfolio budget of USD 386,427,465 covers strengthened national school
feeding and nutrition programmes and country capacity strengthening, an adequate
emergency response and preparedness portfolio and increased support to smallholders.
About 6.7 percent of the budget is allocated to crisis response, 91 percent is allocated to
activities related to integrated school feeding under CSP outcome 2 and 1.6 percent is for
institutional capacity strengthening. Approximately 1 percent of the budget (USD 3,828,000)
will be allocated to the promotion of gender equality and women’s empowerment.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 21
COUNTRY PORTFOLIO BUDGET (USD)
Country
strategic
plan
outcome
Activity 2024 2025 2026 2027 Total
1 1 6 208 239 6 222 187 6 275 226 6 486 705 25 192 358
2 2 70 832 425 80 859 721 96 288 548 96 351 785 344 332 479
3 2 187 699 2 456 900 2 517 972 2 472 131 9 634 702
3 4 2 128 707 1 649 032 1 613 314 1 876 872 7 267 926
Total 81 357 071 91 187 840 106 695 060 107 187 494 386 427 465
6.2 Resourcing outlook and strategy
112. Over recent years, WFP has successfully managed to maintain its government and private
sector donor base, ensuring long-term and stable resources to its school feeding operations,
while attracting new donors to secure additional funding for crisis response. The
Government of Benin has reaffirmed its commitment to funding the new CSP as part of its
strong collaboration with WFP, which remains its partner of choice for the implementation
of the national school feeding programme. This underscores Benin’s commitment to the
state-led development and preservation of human capital. A new funding agreement should
be prepared in 2026 for the third phase of the national school feeding programme and
should fund the last year of the CSP.
113. WFP will look to diversify its resource base by further engaging with donor governments and
international financial institutions, leveraging its strategic positioning with the Government.
WFP will build partnerships with non-traditional and emerging donors including multi-donor
thematic funds such as the Green Climate Fund and the SDG Fund.
114. Regarding crisis response and emergency operations, WFP will advocate greater support to
preparedness and raise donor awareness on the need for stabilization initiatives in view of
the deteriorating security situation in northern Benin. The results-based structure
underpinning the CSP will help to mobilize resources by demonstrating results and impact,
highlighting value for money to donors and the relevance of WFP’s interventions in
humanitarian and development fields.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 22
ANNEX I
LOGICAL FRAMEWORK BENIN COUNTRY STRATEGIC PLAN (2024–2027)
SDG 2: Zero hunger
SDG target 1: Access to food
Country strategic plan outcome 1: People affected by shocks in Benin can meet urgent food
and nutrition needs before, during and after shocks, by 2027
WFP strategic outcome 1: People are better able to
meet their urgent food and nutrition needs Nutritionsensitive
Focus area: crisis response
Assumptions
Availability of funding to implement the activity
Outcome indicators
Consumption-based coping strategy index, reduced CSI
Dietary diversity score
Economic capacity to meet essential needs
Emergency preparedness capacity index
Food consumption score
Food consumption score – nutrition
Livelihood coping strategies for essential needs
Minimum diet diversity for women and girls of reproductive age
Number of national policies, strategies, programmes and other system components contributing to zero hunger and other SDGs enhanced with WFP capacity
strengthening support
Proportion of children 6-23 months of age who receive a minimum acceptable diet
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 23
Activities and outputs
1. Provide food and nutrition assistance to shock-affected people, including school-children, to meet their needs and technical assistance to national
institutions and local actors to strengthen their emergency preparedness and response capacities (URT-1.2: Unconditional resource transfer)
1.1 Food-insecure people affected by shocks receive assistance that meets their direct food and nutrition needs and benefit from the strengthened capacity of
targeted national institutions and local actors to prevent, mitigate and respond to shocks (Output category A: Resources transferred, Standard output 1.1: Food
insecure and crisis-affected populations have access to nutritious food and cash-based assistance, restored assets and services to meet their urgent needs)
1.1 Food-insecure people affected by shocks receive assistance that meets their direct food and nutrition needs and benefit from the strengthened capacity of
targeted national institutions and local actors to prevent, mitigate and respond to shocks (Output category B: Nutritious food provided, Standard output 1.1: Food
insecure and crisis-affected populations have access to nutritious food and cash-based assistance, restored assets and services to meet their urgent needs)
1.1 Food-insecure people affected by shocks receive assistance that meets their direct food and nutrition needs and benefit from the strengthened capacity of
targeted national institutions and local actors to prevent, mitigate and respond to shocks (Output category C: Capacity development and technical support provided,
Standard output 1.1: Food insecure and crisis-affected populations have access to nutritious food and cash-based assistance, restored assets and services to meet
their urgent needs)
Country strategic plan outcome 2: School-age children and communities in Benin have access
to affordable, nutritious diets and basic social services as a result of the leveraging of the
school feeding programme as an entry point for the achievement of enhanced nutrition,
health and education outcomes, by 2027
WFP strategic outcome 2: People have better nutrition,
health and education outcomes Nutritionsensitive
Focus area: root causes
Assumptions
Full community involvement
Outcome indicators
Annual change in enrolment
Attendance rate
Graduation rate
Number of complementary school health and nutrition interventions delivered alongside school feeding delivered by WFP
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 24
Number of national policies, strategies, programmes and other system components contributing to zero hunger and other SDGs enhanced with WFP capacity
strengthening support
Percentage of targeted smallholder farmers reporting increased production of nutritious crops
Percentage of targeted smallholders selling through WFP-supported farmer aggregation systems
Retention rate, by grade
Value of smallholder sales through WFP-supported aggregation systems
Volume of smallholder sales through WFP-supported aggregation systems
Activities and outputs
2. Provide nutritious school meals to schoolchildren through an integrated and inclusive programme that benefits the community (SMP-1.5: School based
programmes)
2.1 Schoolchildren benefit from nutritious and healthy meals every school day and are trained along with their communities in good nutrition and hygiene practices
and climate-sensitive measures (Output category A: Resources transferred, Standard output 2.3: School-age children and adolescents have access to school-based
health and nutrition packages)
2.1 Schoolchildren benefit from nutritious and healthy meals every school day and are trained along with their communities in good nutrition and hygiene practices
and climate-sensitive measures (Output category B: Nutritious food provided, Standard output 2.3: School-age children and adolescents have access to school-based
health and nutrition packages)
2.1 Schoolchildren benefit from nutritious and healthy meals every school day and are trained along with their communities in good nutrition and hygiene practices
and climate-sensitive measures (Output category C: Capacity development and technical support provided, Standard output 2.3: School-age children and adolescents
have access to school-based health and nutrition packages)
2.1 Schoolchildren benefit from nutritious and healthy meals every school day and are trained along with their communities in good nutrition and hygiene practices
and climate-sensitive measures (Output category D: Assets created, Standard output 2.3: School-age children and adolescents have access to school-based health and
nutrition packages)
2.1 Schoolchildren benefit from nutritious and healthy meals every school day and are trained along with their communities in good nutrition and hygiene practices
and climate-sensitive measures (Output category E: Social and behaviour change communication (SBCC) provided, Standard output 2.3: School-age children and
adolescents have access to school-based health and nutrition packages)
2.1 Schoolchildren benefit from nutritious and healthy meals every school day and are trained along with their communities in good nutrition and hygiene practices
and climate-sensitive measures (Output category N: School feeding provided, Standard output 2.3: School-age children and adolescents have access to school-based
health and nutrition packages)
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 25
3. Provide technical assistance to targeted food value chain actors to improve the availability of locally produced nutritious food products, especially for
school canteens (SMS-1.8: Smallholder agricultural market support programmes)
3.1 Targeted food value chain actors, including smallholder farmers, benefit from climate-smart services and capacity building that increase their resilience and
facilitate their access to markets, especially markets connected to school feeding (Output category A: Resources transferred, Standard output 2.1: Food-insecure
populations have increased and sustained access to nutritious food, cash-based assistance, new or improved skills and services to meet their food and nutrition
needs)
3.1 Targeted food value chain actors, including smallholder farmers, benefit from climate-smart services and capacity building that increase their resilience and
facilitate their access to markets, especially markets connected to school feeding (Output category C: Capacity development and technical support provided, Standard
output 2.1: Food-insecure populations have increased and sustained access to nutritious food, cash-based assistance, new or improved skills and services to meet
their food and nutrition needs)
3.1 Targeted food value chain actors, including smallholder farmers, benefit from climate-smart services and capacity building that increase their resilience and
facilitate their access to markets, especially markets connected to school feeding (Output category F: Smallholder farmers supported, Standard output 2.1: Foodinsecure populations have increased and sustained access to nutritious food, cash-based assistance, new or improved skills and services to meet their food and
nutrition needs)
3.1 Targeted food value chain actors, including smallholder farmers, benefit from climate-smart services and capacity building that increase their resilience and
facilitate their access to markets, especially markets connected to school feeding (Output category G: Skills, capacities and services for climate adapted livelihoods,
Standard output 2.1: Food-insecure populations have increased and sustained access to nutritious food, cash-based assistance, new or improved skills and services to
meet their food and nutrition needs)
SDG 17: Partnerships for the goals
SDG target 9: Capacity building
Country strategic plan outcome 3: Targeted institutions and systems in Benin have
strengthened capacity to implement school feeding and other inclusive programmes to
promote food security and nutrition, by 2027
WFP strategic outcome 4: National programmes and
systems are strengthened Nutritionsensitive
Focus area: root causes
Assumptions:
Availability of funding for implementation
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 26
Outcome indicators
Number of complementary school health and nutrition interventions delivered alongside school feeding delivered by WFP
Number of national policies, strategies, programmes and other system components relating to school health and nutrition/including school feeding
enhanced/developed with WFP capacity strengthening support and/or advocacy
Number of people covered (WFP indirect beneficiaries) by national social protection systems or programmes to which WFP provided technical support
Resources mobilized (USD value) for national systems contributing to zero hunger and other SDGs with WFP capacity strengthening support
SABER school feeding index
Transition strategy for school health and nutrition/including school feeding developed with WFP support
Activities and outputs
4. Provide technical assistance to national institutions to enable them gradually to take operational ownership of the national school feeding programme
(SMP-1.5: School based programmes)
4.1 School-age children and communities benefit from the strengthened capacity of the systems and institutions of the national integrated nutrition-sensitive school
feeding programme and the operationalization and gradual transition of the programme to national authorities (Output category C: Capacity development and
technical support provided, Standard output 4.1: National actors have increased capacity and knowledge to enhance policies, strategies, processes and programmes,
contributing to the achievement of zero hunger and other SDGs)
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 27
SDG 17: Partnerships for the goals
CC.1. Protection
Cross-cutting indicators
CC.1.1: Percentage of beneficiaries reporting no safety concerns experienced as a result of their engagement in WFP programmes
CC.1.2: Percentage of beneficiaries who report they experienced no barriers to accessing food and nutrition assistance
CC.1.3: Percentage of beneficiaries who report being treated with respect as a result of their engagement in programmes
CC.1.4: Number of women, men, boys and girls with disabilities accessing food/cash-based transfers/commodity vouchers/capacity strengthening services
CC.1.5: Country office meets or exceeds UNDIS entity accountability framework standards concerning accessibility (QCPR)
CC.2. Accountability
Cross-cutting indicators
CC.2.1: Percentage of beneficiaries reporting they were provided with accessible information about WFP programmes, including PSEA
CC.2.2: Country office meets or exceeds United Nations Disability Inclusion Strategy (UNDIS) standards on consulting organizations of persons with disabilities (QCPR)
CC.2.3: Country office has a functioning community feedback mechanism
CC.2.4: Country office has an action plan on community engagement
CC.2.5: Number of children and adults who have access to a safe and accessible channel to report sexual exploitation and abuse by humanitarian, development, protection
and/or other personnel who provide assistance to affected populations (IOM, OHCHR, UNDP)
CC.3. Gender equality and women’s empowerment
Cross-cutting indicators
CC.3.1: Percentage of households where women, men, or both women and men make decisions on the use of food/cash/vouchers, disaggregated by transfer modality
CC.3.2: Percentage of food assistance decision making entity members who are women
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 28
CC.4. Environmental sustainability
Cross-cutting indicators
CC.4.1: Proportion of field-level agreements (FLAs)/memorandums of understanding (MOUs)/construction contracts (CCs) for CSP activities screened for environmental and
social risks
CC.5. Nutrition integration
Cross-cutting indicators
CC.5.1: Percentage of people supported by WFP operations and services who are able to meet their nutritional needs through an effective combination of fortified food,
specialized nutritious products and actions to support diet diversification
CC.5.2: Percentage of WFP beneficiaries who benefit from a nutrition-sensitive programme component
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 29
SDG 2: Zero hunger
CC.1. Protection
Cross-cutting indicators
CC.1.1: Percentage of beneficiaries reporting no safety concerns experienced as a result of their engagement in WFP programmes
CC.1.2: Percentage of beneficiaries who report they experienced no barriers to accessing food and nutrition assistance
CC.1.3: Percentage of beneficiaries who report being treated with respect as a result of their engagement in programmes
CC.1.4: Number of women, men, boys and girls with disabilities accessing food/cash-based transfers/commodity vouchers/capacity strengthening services
CC.1.5: Country office meets or exceeds UNDIS entity accountability framework standards concerning accessibility (QCPR)
CC.2. Accountability
Cross-cutting indicators
CC.2.1: Percentage of beneficiaries reporting they were provided with accessible information about WFP programmes, including PSEA
CC.2.2: Country office meets or exceeds United Nations Disability Inclusion Strategy (UNDIS) standards on consulting organizations of persons with disabilities (QCPR)
CC.2.3: Country office has a functioning community feedback mechanism
CC.2.4: Country office has an action plan on community engagement
CC.2.5: Number of children and adults who have access to a safe and accessible channel to report sexual exploitation and abuse by humanitarian, development, protection
and/or other personnel who provide assistance to affected populations (IOM, OHCHR, UNDP)
CC.3. Gender equality and women’s empowerment
Cross-cutting indicators
CC.3.1: Percentage of households where women, men, or both women and men make decisions on the use of food/cash/vouchers, disaggregated by transfer modality
CC.3.2: Percentage of food assistance decision making entity members who are women
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 30
CC.4. Environmental sustainability
Cross-cutting indicators
CC.4.1: Proportion of field-level agreements (FLAs)/memorandums of understanding (MOUs)/construction contracts (CCs) for CSP activities screened for environmental and
social risks
CC.5. Nutrition integration
Cross-cutting indicators
CC.5.1: Percentage of people supported by WFP operations and services who are able to meet their nutritional needs through an effective combination of fortified food,
specialized nutritious products and actions to support diet diversification
CC.5.2: Percentage of WFP beneficiaries who benefit from a nutrition-sensitive programme component
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 31
ANNEX II
BENEFICIARIES BY COUNTRY STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME, OUTPUT AND ACTIVITY
Country
strategic
plan
outcome
Output Activity Beneficiary
group
2024 2025 2026 2027 Total
1 1.1 1 Girls 24 200 24 200 24 200 24 200 96 800
Boys 24 800 24 800 24 800 24 800 99 200
Women 35 500 35 500 35 500 35 500 142 000
Men 15 500 15 500 15 500 15 500 62 000
Total 100 000 100 000 100 000 100 000 400 000
2 2.1 2 Girls 690 000 782 000 920 000 920 000 951 050
Boys 810 000 918 000 1 080 000 1 080 000 1 116 450
Women
Men
Total 1 500 000 1 700 000 2 000 000 2 000 000 2 067 500
3.1 3 Girls
Boys
Women 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000
Men 5 000 5 000 5 000 5 000 5 000
Total 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 9 000
Total (without overlap) 1 609 000 1 809 000 2 109 000 2 109 000 2 476 500
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 32
ANNEX III
FOOD RATION (g/person/day) AND CASH-BASED TRANSFER VALUE (USD/person/day)
BY COUNTRY STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME AND ACTIVITY
Country strategic plan
outcome 1*
Country strategic plan
outcome 2
Activity 1 Activity 2
Beneficiary type Crisis-affected populations
(refugees, crisis-affected host
population)
Schoolchildren
(boys, girls)
Modality Food CBTs Food CBTs
Maize 450 75
Rice 75
Beans 60 15
Yellow split peas 15
Vegetable oil 25 10
Salt 5 3
Total kcal/day 1 931 725
% kcal from protein 12 10.6
Cash-based transfer (USD/person/day) 0.5 0.119
Number of feeding days per year 90 175
* A new minimum expenditure basket exercise is being undertaken and the food basket and transfer values may be
adjusted during the implementation of the new CSP.
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 33
ANNEX IV
TOTAL FOOD/CASH-BASED TRANSFER REQUIREMENTS AND VALUE
Food type/cash-based transfer Total (mt) Total (USD)
Cereals 183 686 130 041 312
Pulses 36 402 34 567 090
Oil and fats 12 190 24 927 402
Mixed and blended foods
Other 3 629 1 141 791
Total (food) 235 907 190 677 595
Cash-based transfers 20 783 242
Total (food and cash-based transfer value) 235 907 211 460 837
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 34
ANNEX V
INDICATIVE COST BREAKDOWN BY COUNTRY STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME (USD)
SDG target 2.1/
WFP strategic
outcome 1
SDG target 2.1/
WFP strategic
outcome 2
SDG target 17.9/
WFP strategic
outcome 4
Total
CSP outcome 1 CSP outcome 2 CSP outcome 3
Focus area Crisis response Root causes Root causes
Transfer 21 008 780 280 414 711 5 276 418 306 699 910
Implementation 1 280 800 32 932 558 1 150 751 35 364 109
Adjusted direct support
costs
 1 365 216 19 016 281 397 175 20 778 672
Subtotal 23 654 796 332 363 550 6 824 344 362 842 690
Indirect support costs
(6.5 percent)
 1 537 562 21 603 631 443 582 23 584 775
Total 25 192 358 353 967 181 7 267 926 386 427 465
WFP/EB.2/2023/7-A/1 35
Acronyms
CBT cash-based transfer
COVID-19 coronavirus disease 2019
CSP country strategic plan
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
HGSF home-grown school feeding
IPC Integrated Food Security Phase Classification
NGO non-governmental organization
SABER Systems Approach for Better Education Results
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund
UNSDCF United Nations sustainable development cooperation framework
CSP-EB22023-21289E
